welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Brian
keading Dr Brian keing is a professor of
cosmology at the University of
California San Diego today's discussion
is perhaps the most zoomed out
discussion that we've ever had on this
podcast what I mean by that is today we
talk about the origins of the universe
we talk about the Earth's relationship
to the Sun and to the other planets we
talk a lot about Optics so not just the
Neuroscience of vision and our ability
to see things up close and far away but
to see things very very far away or very
very close up using telescopes or
microscopes respectively so today's
discussion is a far-reaching one
literally and figuratively and one that
I know everyone will appreciate because
it really will teach you how the
scientific process is carried out it
will also help you understand that
science is indeed a human endeavor and
that much of what we understand about
ourselves and about the world around us
and indeed the entire universe is
filtered through that humanness but I
want to be very clear that today's
discussion is not abstract you're going
to learn a lot of concrete facts about
the universe about humanity and about
the process of Discovery in fact much of
what we talk about today is about the
process of human humans discovering
things about themselves and about the
world Dr keing has an incredible
perspective and approach to science
having built for instance giant
telescopes down at the South Pole and
having taken on many other truly
ambitious builds in service to this
thing we call Discovery before we begin
I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford it is however
part of my desire and effort to bring
zero cost to Consumer information about
science and science related tools to the
General Public public in keeping with
that theme this podcast episode does
include sponsors and now for my
discussion with Dr Brian keing Dr Brian
keading welcome Dr Andrew huberman it's
great to meet you in person finally I
thought you were a legend I exist in
real life and uh and you do as well and
I'm delighted that we're going to talk
today because I have a
longstanding adoration there's no other
appropriate word for eyes Vision Optics
the Stars the moons the sun I mean
animals humans what's more interesting
than than how we got here and how we see
things and what we see and why that's
right you're a physicist you're a
cosmologist not a cosmetologist that's
right I do do hair and makeup if you're
interested please Orient Us in the
Galaxy so I get to study you know the
entire universe basically and it's not
really such a a stretch that cosmetology
and cosmology share this prefix because
the prefix Cosmos is what relates those
two words together that seem to be
completely you know unrelated to each
other right but it turns out the word
Cosmos in Greek the atmology of it is
beautiful or appearance so it's we have
a beautiful appearance you know we we
look a certain way we're attracted to
certain things but it kind of reflects
the fact that the night sky is also
beautiful attractive and evoke something
viscerally in us we humans are born with
two refracting telescopes in our in our
skulls embedded in our skulls and as you
point out you know the retina outside
the cranial Vault right I'll I'll never
forget you saying that that means we
have astronomical detection tools built
into us we don't have tools to detect
the higs Bon built into us or to look at
a microscopic virus or something like
that so astronomy is not only the oldest
of all Sciences it's the most visceral
one so connects us and of the Sciences
of that branch of science of
astronomical Sciences cosmology is
really the most overarching it really
includes everything all physical
processes that were involved in the
formation of matter of energy maybe of
time itself and it speaks to a universal
urge I think to know what came before us
like I always ask people I'll ask you I
I know what the answer is probably but
what's your favorite day on the calendar
favorite day on the
calendar I love New Year's Day New
Year's Day exactly what is that it's a
beginning it's a new some people say
their birthday their kids's birthday
their if they're smart their anniversary
right you know you don't want to get too
out of out of control with the misses um
what are those those are Beginnings
what's the only event that no entity
could even bear witness to the origin of
the Universe I think that speaks to
something Primal in human beings that
are curious at least we want to un
uncover the secrets of what existed what
came before us and we don't have any way
of seeing that currently so we have to
use the fossils that have made their way
throughout all of cosmic time to
understand what that was like at the
very beginning of time and perhaps maybe
about the universe that as it existed
before time itself began so to me it's
it's incredibly fascinating it
encompasses all of Science in some sense
it even can include life on other
planets Consciousness the formation of
the brain and you know to me I'm always
interested in the biggest questions and
the biggest topics that evoke curiosity
in me is how did it all get here and so
that's what cosmology allows us to do
apply the strict exacting laws of
physics to a specific you know domain
which is the origin of everything in the
universe that's what makes it so
fascinating I'd like to take a quick
break and acknowledge one of our
sponsors element element is an
electrolyte drink that has everything
you need but nothing you don't that
means the electrolytes sodium magnesium
and potassium all in the correct ratios
but no sugar proper hydration is
critical for optimal brain and body
function even a slight degree of of
dehydration can diminish cognitive and
physical performance it's also important
that you get adequate electrolytes the
electrolytes sodium magnesium and
potassium are vital for the functioning
of all the cells in your body especially
your neurons or your nerve cells
drinking element dissolved in water
makes it extremely easy to ensure that
you're getting adequate hydration and
adequate electrolytes to make sure that
I'm getting proper amounts of hydration
and electrolytes I dissolve one packet
of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of
water when I wake up in the morning and
I drink that basically first thing in
the morning I also drink element
dissolved in water during any kind of
physical exercise that I'm doing
especially on hot days when I'm sweating
a lot and therefore losing a lot of
water and electrolytes they have a bunch
of different great tasting flavors of
element they have watermelon Citrus Etc
frankly I love them all and now that
we're in the winter months in the
northern hemisphere element has their
chocolate medley flavors back in stock I
really like the chocolate flavors
especially the chocolate mint when it's
heated up so you put in hot water and
that's a great way to replenish
electrolytes and hydrate especially when
it's cold and dry out outside when
hydration is especially critical if
you'd like to try element you can go to
drink element.com huberman to claim a
free element sample pack with the
purchase of any element drink mix again
that's drink element.com huberman to
claim a free sample pack today's episode
is also brought To Us by betterhelp
betterhelp offers Professional Therapy
with a licensed therapist carried out
entirely online I've been doing weekly
therapy for well over 30 years initially
I didn't have a choice it was a
condition of being allowed to stay in
school but pretty soon I realized that
therapy is an extremely important
component to overall health in fact I
consider doing regular therapy just as
important as getting regular exercise
including cardiovascular exercise and
resistance training which of course I
also do every week there are essentially
three things that great therapy provides
first of all it provides a good rapport
with somebody that you can trust and
talk to about all issues that you're
concerned about second of all it can
provide support in the form of emotional
support or directed guidance and third
expert therapy can provide useful
insights with better help they make it
very easy to find an expert therapist
with whom you resonate with and can
provide those benefits that come through
effective therapy also because better
help allows therapy to be done entirely
online it's very time efficient it's
easy to fit into a busy schedule there's
no commuting to a therapist's office or
sitting in a waiting room or anything
like that you simply go online and hold
your appointment if you would like to
try betterhelp go to betterhelp.com
huberman to get 10% off your first month
again that's betterhelp.com
huberman before we get to the origins of
the universe and the organization of the
planets relative to the Sun and their
spins
Etc you said something that at least to
me feels int intuitively so true and I
think it's very likely to be true for
everybody which is that there's
something about looking up into space
especially at night when we see the
stars and yeah hopefully see the stars
we'll talk about light pollution a
little bit
later when we see the stars
that yes we know these things are far
away yes we know that they occupy a
certain position in space they have a a
diameter Etc we might not know what that
is just by looking at them you probably
do but but they also change our
perception of time and you know if I
were to say one thing about the human
brain especially is that sure it's got
all these autonomic functions it
regulates heart rate digestion Etc sleep
wake Cycles it can remember it can think
it can have States like Rage or anger or
happiness or
Delight but what's remarkable about the
human brain is that it can think into
the
past it can be quote unquote present and
it can project into the future and I'm
sure other animals can do that but we do
this exquisitly well and we make plans
on the basis of this ability to contract
or expand our notion of
time as a non-biologist but somebody who
I think appreciates and understands
biology why do you think it is that when
we look up into the sky even though most
people might not realize that those
Stars probably aren't there and
occupying the position that we think
they are some of them probably are some
of them aren't they existed a long time
ago but without knowing that why do you
think that looking up at the stars gives
gives us the sense of an expansion of
time as opposed to just the expansion of
space hm well first of all we have to
take ourselves back you know to deep
prehistory we know that ancients were
looking at um at the constellations
because they were seemingly either in
control of or correlated with or perhaps
causitive of the seasons and that was of
you know Divine important you know
Supreme importance for them right their
whole existence in early agrarian
societies hunting societies Gathering
socities um so they had to know about
time so time the the essence of time and
that large scale for seasons for
holidays for festivals for propitiation
of deds and so forth they had to keep
track of it and that's why in the caves
in Lasco that you know date back to the
you know 40,000 bcee um they depict
constellations Orion the hunter Taurus
the Bull all these different
constellations they depict them there
now partially that was because you know
Netflix didn't exist back then right
there was no Tik Tok and and so there
wasn't much to do at night and in fact
the more you were out at night you
probably increased your opportunity to
be you know consumed by some Predator
right so you were you were more focused
on being stationary observing and as I
said we can do astronomy uniquely so
amongst all the Sciences with just the
equipment we're born with you know
measurements with our eyes with respect
to landmarks to C calculate patterns and
humans are exceptionally good at
recognizing patterns sometimes too good
so for instance knowing that a certain
swath of stars is present at one time of
year and not another relative to say the
um the Contour of a of a mountain ridge
yes and and the and the repetition of it
over and it passed down through
generations before there was written
language there was pictography there was
the cave paintings and so forth there
was oral language and that was it for
you know written language is only you
know 10,000 years old or something like
that so to store information that meant
it was a continuity between Generations
my great- great grandfather's Elders
whatever taught me that when the moon is
in this constellation the sun is in this
constellation um we all should plant or
we should you know harvest in other con
in other times and so it was and it we
still do used the you know the rotation
of the earth you know hasn't changed
that much since this 40,000 year period
right I mean the the axis in which it
rotates that's a different story but uh
but the the actual spin rate the angular
momentum of the Earth has not
appreciably changed that much and so the
positions of these objects were of such
importance uh that the Ancients would
use them for all these purposes but
there were so few things that changed
position that they actually had names
for them they're called planets so
planet in Greek it's like the word plane
like airplane it means something that
moves or wanders so when you name
something it means it's it's pretty
different from the other things in which
are not associated with that
characteristic so the planets there were
only five that they could you know see
at that time up to Saturn um and they
actually would associate those not only
with astronomical events but events down
on Earth that's what connected the Earth
so we we have Legacy of that in our
calendar today so Sunday named after the
Sun Monday Moon Tuesday and you go to
the Latin languages I think it's Mercury
Mercury day which is mercury day uh vent
Venus day so you go to the romance
languages and then uh the only one
that's not a Latin name is of course for
Thor the God Thor Thursday and then uh
comes back Saturn day Saturday so they
were all used as a clock and you people
don't really grasp this I mean we have
an Apple Watch we have whatever we
didn't have a clock that was functional
that would work on all different time
zones that all different conditions on
the pitching deck of a ship till the
1700s basically it was a huge problem
and so measuring time became crucial for
Commerce for uh you know human culture
and civilization to arise for education
and obviously for planting harvesting
and so forth so there was an obvious
connection between the two they believed
actually that they were causitive that
actually the position of the planet
Jupiter determined something on the day
of your birth and the son's relative
position with respect to it determined
something about your your your future
and your and your you know prospects in
life and and so forth so when I'm not
confused for a cosmetologist you know
because my lovely hair and makeup uh I'm
usually asked you know oh you're an
astronomer um I'm a Virgo you know so uh
what's going to happen to me I'm like I
used to be okay that's an astrologer I'm
not an astrologer but now I just I kind
of lean into it I'm like o that uh
you're going to get a letter from the
IRS next week and that lump on your ass
mean you you're you're playing games
with them so you don't believe in
astrology uh there's no evidence for
astrology in in fact there's there's you
know many many random controlled you
know trials double bun studies that show
not only is it it's almost counter to
the evidence you know like when they say
that a monkey can throw a dart at a
stock chart and get you know do better
than most hedge fund managers or
something like that actually astrologers
are even worse like I don't even know
protozoa could throw a dart yeah it's
it's almost anti-correlated you know
with with what reality is so no there's
certainly no validity to that and I I
added you know provocative tweet uh you
know whatever post recently um and it
was about um there's actually you know
we believe there are 12 zodiac con signs
that dates back to the Persians and the
Babylonians and how they divided up them
and it almost divides you know they were
fascinated with the number 60 so that
that was the base of their number system
our number system is 10 because we have
10 fig for some reason they love base 60
I don't know why um and so they love
things that divided evenly into it 10
does but anyway uh you know hash fail
for the for the Babylonians but they
divide up into 12 12 uh zodiac signs so
we still use those there's a problem
though the Zodiac that you're do you
know what this is do you know what
determines your zodiac sign no okay so
it it's determined by the position of
the sun what constellation was the sun
in on the day you were born September
26th so uh when the that means that the
sun was in the constellation Vergo oh no
you are a Libra Libra Libra okay so you
do know what you are but you don't know
why you are uh so Libra me means it's a
constellation there's 88 constellations
that are accepted by astronomers and the
uh one of them is Libra and the path
that the Sun and the Moon and all the
planets travel and it's called the
Zodiac it's confined to a plane because
the same uh Proto Proto solar system dis
from which we formed out of all the
planets came out of a nebular cloud a
cloud of gas dust rocks and so forth
that came from a pre-existing star that
exploded creating what's called a
supernova the Supernova provided the
materials to make not only the Earth but
the entire solar system including the
Sun that happened about five billion
years ago and four billion years ago the
Earth formed out of that cloud that the
spin of that disc all things have a spin
associated with them like a figure
skater you know as she's spinning around
on her Axis or whatever she can have her
arms out brings them in she spins faster
that's called conservation of angular
momentum spin as a type of angular
momentum the whole disc is spinning in a
plane it's like this desk this table
that sitting at if listening imagine a
flat table it's spinning a circular disc
is spinning with a certain direction all
the objects are moving in that same
direction due to conservation of this
term called angular momentum the sun
moves in that apparently moves in that
position obviously we're rotating around
the Sun but it looks like the sun's
coming around us the Moon is Jupiter so
on the day you were born there's a
constellation behind the Sun from our
perspective that was Libra on September
26th and that was the day that you were
born that determines the fact that
you're Libra but there's a problem in
December where we are now the sun is
actually in a different constellation
the one that doesn't exist according to
the Zodiac that was created something
like 6 th 5,000 years ago it's called
ukas so there's a certain segment of
people born in a 17-day stretch in
December late November to early December
that are actually aukin or ukases or
whatever so that should obliterate
astrology as any semblance of a science
because they didn't even know the
constellation existed and yet something
like 12% of all people share that
constellation so it's just complete
nonsense there's no validity to it twins
that are born on the same day have
radically different you know histories
past Futures and um there's no
predictive power to it and that's what
science is about right we want to make a
hypothesis test it iterate on it and
have confirmation of it and there's zero
in fact for astrology in fact if you'll
permit me a kind of silly story uh when
I was dating my wife who would become my
wife in the beginning um we she you know
kind of thought it's fun maybe we'll go
see a you know uh uh you know someone
who can tell our our our fortunes that
we belong together so we went to an
astrologer and uh the astrologer asked
me a bunch of questions you know when
were you born obviously and um oh no she
asked me what's your sign so I I said
I'm a Gemini and she said okay cool and
then she told me a bunch of things and
at the end I said I just want to double
check and I was playing I'm kind of a
you know a little bit of a jerk
sometimes so I said I just want to
confirm um Gemini is born in September
I'm born in September setember 9th oh no
no that's a Virgo but the same things
are going to happen to you anyway like
it didn't change her outcome and so in
the language of the science philosophy
of science Carl poer others it's
unfalsifiable and you cannot be proven
right it's so flexible you know you're
going to find challenges the stock
market is going to fluctuate uh
political turmoil rain during your
they're so flexible it can accommodate
any story and that's a Hallmark of
non-science or sometimes anti-scientific
thinking one thing that strikes me is
the fact that at least is the way you
describe it the first clock the first
timekeeping approach or mechanism was to
evaluate the position of things in the
sky relative to Celestial landmarks yeah
so irrespective of when people are born
in astrology uh I could imagine a a a
tribe of people a group of people who
have charts because they've you know
painted them onto some surface doesn't
matter with the surface is that um at
some portion of the year uh the stars
are above this Ridge there are three
bright stars above the the the ridge
just to the to the left of the front of
the village so to speak like this is not
an unreasonable thing to imagine and
that information has passed down in the
form of when those three stars are about
to
disappear behind that Ridge um days are
getting
shorter whereas when those three stars
are um reemerging again elsewhere in the
sky yes days are getting longer um
forgive me this will be a little bit of
a long question sometimes the listeners
get upset with me but I think it'll
frame it within the biology in a way
that that will be meaningful for us and
for
everyone other animals besides humans
have this thing the pineal gland that
secretes melatonin the duration of
melatonin release is directly related to
how much light there is in other words
light suppresses melatonin therefore in
short days AKA long nights you get a lot
more melatonin released in long
days and short nights you get less
melatonin so this is the intrinsic clock
keeping mechanism of all mamalian
species and reptiles most people don't
realize this but reptiles um often have
either a thin skull birds have a very
thin skull so that light can actually
pass through the skull to the
pineal some reptiles actually have pits
in the top of their heads that light can
pass directly in to the pineal these are
animals that mind you also have eyes for
perceiving things but this is the
primordial biologically primordial
timekeeping device and you imagine why
this would be really important and then
I'll get back to why I think that
because humans have a pineal that's
embedded deep in the brain light cannot
despite what some people think out there
I'm not going to name names but light
cannot get through the skull to the
pineal nor is putting a a light in your
ear ears going to get there or even in
the roof of your mouth very unlikely
maybe some distant stimulation of the
neurons in your hypothalamus with long
wavelength light but in any case the
pineal of humans is embedded deep in the
skull and so that information about uh
how much light is in the environment has
to be passed through the eyes through a
Securus circuit to the through a Securus
path to the to the pineal but here's the
thing here here's the the
conundrum an animal or human born into
an 8-hour
day when days are getting longer has a
very different future as an infant as a
infant or baby that's born into an8 hour
day when days are getting shorter
especially if you live closer to the
poles further from the equator so think
about this you're a pregnant woman or
you're the husband of that pregnant
woman and you have a baby coming and you
need to know that days are getting
longer or shorter and what that means
for resources because the probability of
the survival of that child and and even
the mother during and immediately after
uh childbirth was strongly dictated by
what resources were available the
strength of the immune system Etc
animals solve this by light going
directly into the
pineal I'm not one of those animals so I
don't know if they're conscious of this
humans needed to solve this some other
way they needed to know whether or not
days were getting longer or shorter and
so the question I have is is the
movement of the stars or
planets detect able enough with these
telescopes that we have in the front of
our
skull is it perceivable enough that one
could know whether or not days were
getting longer or shorter simply by
looking up at the sky at night or are
the shifts
imperceptible and therefore you would
need to create these charts and now I
think it's kind of obvious while I'm
asking this question because to me this
is the reason to chart time and this is
the reason it occurs to me why looking
up at the sky at night is Meaningful for
tracking time absolutely absolutely and
and not only correlated with that um
something even more perhaps basic is you
know temperature right in the hemisphere
that you're born in uh you would expect
that all you know I'm I'm born as I said
September 9th turns out that's the
statistically statistically most common
birth date of humans on Earth and why is
that because people are busy during the
winter holiday exactly right so there's
a correlation right yeah they're at home
and they're indoors and and they're
they're procreating and they right um or
another thing is uh uh what month you're
born in you go back nine months so so
actually the the um you know cons uh
capitalism is awesome right so it's so
efficient so when you go to CVS I I've
known this you know several times thank
God because my wife's been pregnant
several times and um and we have several
kids and when you go to CVS it's it's
actually pretty interesting she goes
there to buy a pregnancy test now she's
the kind of neurotic you know person
that she she had to buy like five
pregnancy tests for each kid okay I
don't know why but that's what she did
so she's a she likes data she's got the
how do you okay everybody statistics how
do you reduce variability increase
sample size yes unless it's a systematic
error and that's what I want to talk to
you about later when it comes to the eye
and other things you go to CVS you buy a
pregnancy test and you know she's on
their gold plan program you know
whatever she got the gold card from CVS
uh because she's done it so many times
uh but um when you go there they know
you're getting a pregnancy test so
exactly nine months later we start
getting advertisements for Pampers and
for diapers and for diaper creams and
wipes and stuff because they know this
they know hedging even without KN the
test what's the downside for them well
she buys five tests they're probably
assuming something very different than
if she bought one test anyway so uh the
temperature right so if you're gestating
during uh summertime versus winter time
that obviously will have some kind of an
effect I mean you can tell me a lot more
than that but more than that you hinted
at this um and I'm not going to make you
do any any math surrounding pregnancy
but um God forbid
but I sympath I put out the cor I was
talking fast with the irony of that one
I'll just say for the record I'm just
blushing the the irony of that one is
that we published numerous times for my
lab cumulative probability and I teach
this stuff so it's often times when
you're going fast but that one I totally
deserved and I you know whatever
whatever shades of red I might I might
turn that's what a good scientist does
but uh but but they actually think that
the first astronomers were women think
about it because they notice this
correlation what's their monthly cycle
their menstrual cycle is exactly 29 and
a half days which is actually the lunar
cycle down to almost the minute it's
insane right um that that they would
have looked up and noticed this renewal
and and and and diminishing of the Moon
and that there's actually evidence now
they weren't professional astronomers
until you know actually the first
professional female astronomer wasn't
until like the 1700s in England um where
she was recognized for using telescopes
and so forth but but no they were very
keen on that and they were they were
probably dialed into that and what that
portended as you alluded to for the
future of their child I mean this is a
huge biological investment men didn't
don't have that so actually we are less
symmetrical you know this than women
right we have our testies or different
links or whatever I guess normal normal
men at least but women are more
symmetrical but they're actually they
have an extra timekeeping device that
men we can't relate to that they're
menstrual cycle they're menstral cycle
some women are keenly aware of the
ovulation event they will describe it as
a feeling as if it's breaking off and
and migrating within them and I I have
every reason to believe them earlier you
asked and I know this um will get some
people to ears pricked up whether or not
uh when a child is
born with respect to the seasonal cycle
impacts that child there there are a lot
of data around this MH it depends on um
the environment in which one lives so
closer to the Equator yeah it's very
different situation the equal day is all
day long there were some data and I'd
love to get an update on this so um
somebody knows they can put in the
comments that you know that
schizophrenia was far more um prevalent
As you move away from the equator
and then there was a guy at Caltech he
has since passed but had um some
interesting data about mothers who
contracted influenza during a certain
phase of the second trimester heightened
probability for schizophrenic Offspring
but big big caveat here none of it was
was causal of course and then there are
all sorts of interesting things about
you know uh placental effects and and so
there's there it's a multivariable thing
and we know that because identical twins
even that share the same cionic sack
right uh one can be schizophrenic and
the other no although there is a higher
concordance than if say they're in
different they're a dichorionic two two
different uh sacks so but time of birth
relative to the seasons sure seasons
correlating of course with abundance or
lack of food abundance or lack of um
various infectious diseases influenza in
particular these things are are relevant
but we'd have to make a real big stretch
to then include the effects of the
planet Jupiter which is the biggest
planet and is most of the mass of uh of
our solar system outside of the Sun then
it would be clear and you could do this
test with identical twins and and and
that are identical versus fraternal
twins twins that are raised with the
same parent you know some are separated
at Birth and they they they turn out
very much more similarly when they're
identical twins ver so shows that
genetics play more of a role than we
like to think jeans jeans are powerful
they are I realize this is a a bit um
Politically Incorrect to say in certain
venues but genes are extremely powerful
yeah why wouldn't they be right yeah
absolutely I mean nurture matters as
well are immensely powerful so and I
think that that gives us hope you know
people say well you know we're we're we
should not be so hoty we should not be
so arrogant you know we we have what uh
50% of the same uh chromosomes as a
fruit flly you know like who are you to
be and I I say I'll do you one better
like I think some bonobos have 98%
similarity but that should give us more
you know sort of like treat ourselves
and think of ourselves in a way that's
more you know you know more elevated I
would say cuz we're not that there's
many species of chimpanzees and primates
and so there's only one human you know
Homo Sapien which you know a lot of
people don't know the the word you know
homo sapan which is our species and our
genus um sapen doesn't mean it doesn't
mean knowledge like science cenia means
knowledge sapience means wisdom and I
like to look atmology I'm fascinated by
it but it kind of highlights what we
should be doing and what what is it that
we are aware of I mean I I'm curious
have you ever encountered like why are
we called know humans that like the wise
hominid and it's because we're the only
entity organism that knows it's going to
die yes there's some elephants that you
know before the one dies the one will
take care it's not the same as like you
knew you were going to die when you were
a kid very young and it's that awareness
of death and the awareness of how
special we are I think that's what
invests life with a lot more meaning I
don't want to get too philosophical time
perception it's that's exactly I'm an
expert on happiness sitting here and and
then Morgan howo is an expert on the
relationship between psychological
happiness and money sitting here and he
described this uh cartoon which
inevitably makes me chuckle of a guy and
his dog sitting by a lake and the
there's a bubble you know sort of
bubbles coming out of the guy's head and
and he's thinking about whatever his his
stock portfolio and things back home Etc
and out of the dog's head is just a
mirror image of him sitting with his
owner the dogs are very present but what
that also means is that they are not
able to perceive their own existence
within within modeling of time as you
said before we can forecast we that's
how we we don't have the strongest
muscles the sharpest claws the biggest
teeth right what do we have we have this
frontal prefrontal cortex that allows us
to uh to do what are called gunan or
thought experiments Einstein said um to
predict the future to model the future
not really predict it we can't do that
but we can model likely outcomes and we
can simulate in our minds what those
would be like and we're so dependent on
that skill that we sometimes confuse you
know correlation for causation and as
you know everyone who confuses coration
with causation ends up dying so it's
very dangerous to it's very dangerous to
do that uh but but the point is the
notion of what's called confirmation
bias is prevalent in every human being
scientist or not and in fact as
scientists you and I we have to guard
against that more than anybody because
nothing really feels better than like
thinking of a hypothesis modeling the
future and then feeling like you're
right and then you get celebrated and
FedEd maybe you went a golden medallion
with Alfred nobel's image on it or
whatever those kinds of things are very
powerful and those kinds of things are
also very dangerous which is why it
appeals to so many more people to think
that the celestial orbs play a role in
our lives it's almost like we've
reverted to a paganistic existence where
we want to believe there's some some
Force responsible for our Fates when
when maybe it's random on I totally
agree with you I'll play devil's
advocate for a moment not for astrology
per se but uh for instance there are
many species that use Magneto reception
they can sense magnetic fields I think
turtles do this some migrating birds do
this some pigeons there's even some
evidence that within the I believe this
is still true um that within the eye of
the fly the fruit fly that there are
some Magneto receptors um so it turns
out there are some humans that perform
better than chance in a Magneto
reception perceptual task yeah you know
this is um very surprising to me it can
be trained up somewhat but I'm sure
there are a number of people hearing
this that they M El feel that they can
sense magnetic fields there is a
capacity to do that greater than chance
in some individuals it's a very weak
capacity yeah so I think humans love the
idea that there's
something um skills or um uh qualities
beyond our reflexive understanding that
we all Harbor this idea that we have
superpowers that we just need to tap
into sixense you six sense or this
person has a stroke and suddenly is
speaking conversational French and
therefore you know neuroplastic I ities
you know Etc or what's it pro perception
or um our colleague when you were at San
Diego um R Chandra Ram yeah like um the
synesthesia right certainly synesthesia
exists people who will hear certain key
on the piano and immediately evokes the
the uh the perception of of a particular
color not not just red but a particular
shade of red in a very consistent way
now if that was useful for something
maybe it is useful I mean might cross
unusual crossmodal plasticity is what we
would call it yeah but so could could
that not be you know made into an
argument well that means that there that
this is a general feature that we just
don't know how to access but maybe like
we could go to the uh we could go to the
gym and and you know mental gym or do
something to enhance that like you said
I don't know some people do that with
like infrared near infrared wavelengths
that they do some kind of training and
they claim they can see certain things
um the question is how useful is it and
then how how predictive is it and I
don't think that we can make a case for
the you know predictive elements of the
position as I said of Mars and Mercury
being in retrograde as it is now like
most but the thing that's shocking is
that like look there's there's a whole
page in almost every newspaper except
the excur bable New York time no I'm
just kidding that New York Times uh does
still around
they uh it's it's very interesting I'll
tell you off the air recent recent uh
encounter I've had with the New York
Times but but um but most newspapers
have more you know 10 hundreds of times
more ink written about astrology than
astronomy I mean it's barely it'll
barely be in there and why is that it's
capitalistic Society so people are you
know crave this notion that there's some
explanation for the random seeming
events that occur in their lives and
that's an urge as ancient as you know
human civilization
itself I'd like to take a quick break
and acknowledge our sponsor ag1 ag1 is a
vitamin mineral probiotic drink that
also includes prebiotics and adaptogens
ag1 is designed to cover all of your
foundational nutritional needs and it
tastes great now I've been drinking ag1
since 200 12 and I started doing that at
a time when my budget for supplements
was really Limited in fact I only had
enough money back then to purchase one
supplement and I'm so glad that I made
that supplement ag1 the reason for that
is even though I strive to eat most of
my foods from Whole Foods and minimally
processed foods it's very difficult for
me to get enough fruits vegetables
vitamins and minerals micronutrients and
adaptogens from food alone and I need to
do that in order to ensure that I have
enough energy throughout the day I sleep
well at night and keep my immune system
strong wrong but when I take ag1 daily I
find that all aspects of my health my
physical health my mental health and my
performance both cognitive and physical
are better I know that because I've had
lapses when I didn't take ag1 and I
certainly felt the difference I also
notice and this makes perfect sense
given the relationship between the gut
microbiome and the brain that when I
regularly take ag1 which for me means a
serving in the morning or midm morning
and again later in the afternoon or
evening that I have more mental Clarity
and more mental energy if you'd like to
try ag1 you can go to drink drink a1.com
huberman to claim a special offer for
this month only January 2025 ag1 is
giving away 10 free travel packs and a
year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again go to
drink a1.com huberman to claim the 10
free travel packs and a year supply of
vitamin D3 K2 it speaks to what I think
is one of the core functions of the
human brain which you know uh umbrella
is everything we're talking about which
is the human brain is a prediction
making machine and it wants to make
predictions on the basis of things that
feel reliable and the ability for us to
well confirmation bias the ability for
us to link a and t as opposed to a b c
and work through things linearly and try
and disprove our own hypothesis is much
stronger than any um desire to work
through things systematically unless
you're trained as a scientist exactly Y
and so it's no surprise to me that
people um want to understand themselves
and understand others in a way that uh
feels at least semi-reliable and to do
that in a way where they don't have to
run a ton of experiments and uh hence
hence astrology I'd like to um stay
within this vein of thought but you said
something earlier that's been kind of
you know um nagging in the back of my
brain you said we have two refracting
telescopes in the front of our skull um
I will often remind people that your
retinas that line the back of your eyes
like a like a pie crust are part of your
brain your central nervous system that
was literally squeezed out of your skull
during the first trimester through a
whole genetic program that's very
beautiful and this might freak you out
but think about it this is the only
portion of your brain that resides
outside the cranial Vault yeah
technically still in your skull but
outside the cranial Vault gives humans
an enormous capacity that they wouldn't
have otherwise because what you can make
judgments about space and time space
based on what's next to what what's far
from what and time based on movement of
things relative to stationary objects
Etc that we wouldn't otherwise be able
to perform right you could sense odors
at a distance smoke Etc but it's a whole
other business to have these two
telescopes could you explain what you
mean by two refracting telescopes
because I think that will set the stage
nicely for some of our other discussion
about Optics yeah so I've in love with
telescope since the you know age of
about 12 when I could first afford one
to buy one of my own and and that really
came out of the fact that I recognize
the limitations of the human eye it
turned out I was 12 years old woke up in
the middle of the night one night there
was this incredibly bright light you
know brighter than these lights here
shining into my room and I was like
where I don't know there's a street
light outside it's is crazy let me look
outside and see what it is and it was
the moon and I had never seen it was
near near moonet which is near Sunrise
full moon and I looked at it and I kept
staring at it and there was a star next
to it that kind of looked like a piece
of the Moon had broken off it was that
bright and that clear and it's unusual
to see these kinds of things together
they're actually known as sizes which is
a great great uh Scrabble word if you're
ever you know pressed for for a win in
Scrabble use the word siy I think it's
like 80 points um and that just means a
conjunction an alignment of astronomical
objects I was like what the hell is this
this is 1984 Andrew you know you're
younger than me but but Google did not
exist for another 16 years and I I was
kind of impatient I wanted to know what
this thing was what is this thing it's
not moving it's not flashing it's not a
drone you know back then it's not a it's
not Southwest Airlines right so I'm
looking at it it's not moving and day
after day it was like that and I was
like what how am I going to find this
out like imagine exist we're so blessed
that we have the internet and we have
these llms it's so easy now to be a
scientists or do research and anybody
can do research science is for everybody
right you always highlight that fact so
I realized the only way to find out
about it was to wait for the New York
Times to get delivered on Sunday because
they did have a section back then that
they don't have now called Cosmos and in
it depicted what the night sky looked
like that night which is a Sunday and
that was like three or four days after
what you know I had this observation
which you know was incredibly uh you
know observant uh and I looked at it and
it was the Moon it showed the moon and
it showed Jupiter I was like what you
can see a planet with your naked eye
this was around the time Voyager you
know was going by the planets on The
Grand Tour of the solar system never
been done before I was like I thought
you needed a spaceship you know and and
I realized that was my first bit of
astronomical research you know I looked
up I had a hypothesis what is it I was
wrong I thought it was a star it was a
planet I was like this is insane you
know imagine what I could see if I had a
telescope but but I couldn't afford a
telescope we were pretty modest means
back then I had a job working at a
delicate test in down the street and I
do that once a week and then you know I
got a grant from a three-letter agency
you know which is the beginning of many
many scientist careers I got a grant
from the mom agency my mother she
supplemented my $2 an hour salary at the
Venice delicatessan in dobs Ferry and I
ended up getting a telescope for
$75 and I you know cherish this thing
and and then I was like oh let me look
at these things in the sky and it's
pretty amazing uh I I don't know if you
know the history of telescopes but the
first ones were invented because of uh
the the glass that was present to make
eyeglasses so telescopes came from
eyeglasses where was the Best glasses
where were the Best glasses made in the
Netherlands so actually the telescope
and the microscope were both invented in
Holland and the guy who invented the
telescope was is very interesting
because it would be like he he made the
telescope but he never thought to look
at the at the night sky with it he only
used it as a spy glass to look at
objects you know on the horizon or in a
city or whatever he never went like this
looked up you know 45 that required
Galileo so he's my absolute hero of all
of science we'll talk about him later
maybe um Galileo was the first person to
ever look up with this telescope and
spot objects in the solar system in the
universe that had never been seen before
with a scientific tool so everybody had
to use their eyes and back to TI brah
Kepler cernus they had to use their eyes
which are telescopes I'll get back to
that don't worry um I I know you afford
me the podcaster you know predilection
of of going off on long tangents but I
think this is good um Galileo then said
well I'm going to take this telescope
and look at these objects that are
otherwise look like stars and in fact
we're called you know basically
Wanderers because they're only things
that moved first looked at the moon now
take yourself back to 16009 when he was
first looking at these objects 1609
there were no clocks there are no
scientific tools of any any real virtue
uh he in fact would invent many of these
things there were simple things like a
magnetic compass a slide rule which
nobody you know known in your main
demographic will not a slide rul is but
that's okay um very simple tools um you
know they would use tubes and whatnot
but Galileo looked at the moon and the
hypotheses was everything in the
universe is orbiting around the earth
the earth is the most perfect place in
the universe because God puts the things
that are most important close to him
than center of the universe God is the
center of the universe the Catholic
Church held this and everything will go
around the earth and in fact I I'm not
going to challenge you because I I I I
think you'll defeat me in this in this
but in your audience there probably very
many educated I call them edu people
there's many many educated people I find
that even with my brilliant students at
UCSD they can't prove that the Earth is
not the center of the solar system in
other words I'll say on my astronomy 101
quiz I'll say prove that the Earth is is
the uh is not the center of the solar
system which was the whole universe back
then right and I would say it's about 75
80% will not get it right in fact I can
say to most people proof the Earth is
not flat I claim the Earth is flat prove
me wrong most people can't prove it they
don't know how the proof is constructed
I don't expect them to go and replicate
what arist darkus did you know 2,000
years ago but this is knowledge we've
had for two as I said 2,000 years the
knowledge that the earth goes around the
Sun and not the other way around is only
about 400 years old but I would say 99%
I know for a fact I went to Italy
actually uh 10 years ago it was the
100th anniversary of Einstein's theory
of general relativity and they we had a
ceremony to honor the first person who
ever came up with a theory of relativity
which is also Galileo Galileo had the
first notion that relative motion is
indistinguishable that if you and I are
on a bike and I'm stationary you can't
tell if you're moving I can't tell if
I'm stationary that's called relativity
of motion it's not motion is not
absolute Einstein would later enhance
that you know put on steroids and then
come up with all sorts of cool stuff
that we can get into but um but this
notion that you could do observations
that you could use a scientific tool
couple with a hypothesis and then
iterate on those hypotheses to make both
the instrument better and your
hypothesis better and then expose that
to Scientific peer review which was not
what we have today that was done by
Galileo he was the first person to use
the scientific method what did he use it
with a telescope so a telescope that he
used was a refracting telescope lenses
like eyeglasses two of them one put at
the far end called The Objective it's
closer to the object the other one the
iPie is close to your eye and he was
able to magnify things about 3 to 10
times pretty easily can you explain
refraction for people that that yeah are
not when light light is the light
travels at the fastest speed um of any
entity you know photons travel at uh
roughly 300,000 kilometers per second uh
except when they go into a medium that's
what they travel in in in the vacuum of
space or in a vacuum in my laboratory or
whatever but when they go into a medium
that's uh transparent or translucent uh
they slow down the you can you can think
of it as the light waves themselves
imagine uh light waves as rows of
soldiers marching together and then uh
imagine that they're walking at an angle
to to the beach here in in Los Angeles
they're marching at an angle the ones
that encounter the water first they
start to slow down the other ones keep
moving at a fast speed and then the
whole beam of light the whole beam of
soldiers gets bent that process is
called refraction we can do it well this
yber mate is so delicious we can't do it
because it's it's got a little bit of
cloud to it similar to for instance if
you go and uh look at a fountain and you
see a coin and you decide you know
you're going to be that mischievous kid
and you're going to grab that coin so
you can throw it back in like any uh you
can you can recycle the wish um and you
reach down to grab it and you miss
because where you see it is not where it
actually is yeah put a pencil in a clear
glass of water same phenomenon will
happen that's refraction it's the
bending of light by what's called a
dialectric or just a medium that's
transparent or translucent and uh you
can do that in a way that you shape the
wave of light coming in that it will be
magnified and that's in fact what a
telescope does t means distance scope
means viewer so a telescope really means
distance viewer a microscope means small
thing viewer and so this was kind of
revolutionary to use it for scientific
purposes Galia did other things we just
take these for granted we got all these
cool cameras here these are all
refracting telescopes you can see the
lens in one you can see that it's on a
tripod Galileo invented the tripod we
take these things for granted but people
didn't realize that what a stud yeah I
want to get a list of all the things
that the Galileo did I I'm going to
pause you for one second and I please um
earmark where you're at because um I
have a number of questions that I just
can't resist asking fine first of all if
it's too lengthy an answer feel free to
say you know pass but uh why was the
best glass in um in Holland what what is
it about the Dutch and and good glass I
think that they were extremely as they
are now I have great colleagues that are
that are from the Netherlands um they
were obsessed with with um high quality
as as Germans are you know there very
similar to Germans uh very uh into very
precise instrumentation and high quality
uh it's interesting to note that the uh
that glasses were only really invented
in some sense um because of the fact
that there was an existing standard for
human visual Acuity okay so we we all
know we go to the eye eyasses ey glasses
yeah so we know today that when you go
to the eye doctor there's an eye chart
right and we all SN it's called the
Snelling chart SN chart when you go to
the DMV they you use the same thing
numbers and letters of different sizes
that at a given distance if you can read
all of them then you have whatever High
let's just say high Acuity Vision we
won't get into we won't get into yeah uh
and if you can only read you know three
lines down and then you're essentially
um blind to the rest then you have less
than average vision and in the state of
California they'll still give you a
driver's license there are many people
bu there are many people driving in the
United States by the way who qualify as
legally blind because when you drive you
mainly use your peripheral vision they
are granted a driver's license this this
should terrify everybody but all those
ey charts every DMV here has the exact
same size for the e at the top okay it's
a calibration standard how could they do
that 400 years ago we're talking 430
years ago turns out there was one and
only one standard that was acceptable
across all of Western Europe it was the
Gutenberg Bible the Gutenberg Bible was
set in print by Gutenberg and it had a
fixed size of all the characters so what
they would do is at a couple of feet
they put the the gudenberg Bible in
front of people it's amazing to think
about it because there's only like 10
copies of the gudenberg Bible still left
they're all in vaults they're all worth
hundreds of millions of dollars you you
can't buy them even if you're you know
Elon um when you look at it you would be
able to tell that you could not see at
one foot what I could not see what
Andrew could see at one foot so you knew
that there was something diminishing my
visual Acuity whether who knows what it
was but they knew that they could then
correct that lens to be as good as 20 or
you know get up to your standard for me
and that was the way that they would
judge how good your eyes were and so
they then would correct that with lenses
and I always point out how ironic it is
because later on Galileo would take
those two lenses and instead of putting
one on each eye he put one in front of
the other one and then use that to
construct a telescope he didn't he
didn't actually invent the telescope but
he perfected the telescope so just like
apple didn't invent the smartphone they
perfected it just like Facebook didn't
invent social networking they perfected
it right so it's it's usually the second
mouse gets the cheese they like to say
he was the ultimate second mouse he
would always improve things and make
them so much better that he would
obliterate his
competition but it was cernus if I'm not
mistaken that was the first to say that
the Earth revolves around the sun while
rotating on its axis and tilts which
gives us the Equinox correct yes okay so
Galileo corrected cernus about the math
but it was cernus that um that gave us
the first like trusted statement that
the earth and the other planets rotate
around the sun yeah he I would say he
gave the hypothesis he wasn't he wasn't
wrong Gallo didn't correct him it just
Galileo brought evidence to the table he
brought hard scientific observ who this
cernus guy was he just sort of like a
iconic class he's like hey how about
we're not the center of the universe
it's the sun that's the center of
universe so what was the Milo of the
time was that um the Earth was the
center of the of the universe which was
our solar system effectively was the
whole universe they didn't know about
stars and Galaxy certainly we can get
into that later uh but there was what's
known as the talic um concept of the
organization of the cosmos so the
earliest cosmological models were that
the sun is the center of the earth is
the center of the universe and
everything goes around it however these
were not dopes they knew that there were
problems with that model there are
certain aspects of of the of the orbits
of Planets For example I mentioned
Mercury's retrograde and what what does
retrograde mean we don't have to get
into it but there are anomalies that the
planets will undergo at different times
of the year uh due to the fact that the
Earth is we know now Ro rotating
revolving around the Sun and rotating on
its axis but the main effect is its
revolution around the Sun and the other
planets are to in the same plane the
Zodiac plane the What's called the
ecliptic due to the angular momentum of
the Proto solar system and sometimes the
earth goes faster than say Jupiter so
originally it'll be out in front if you
will of the planet you know forward
Center of motion as you'd like to say
and then it'll be behind it later on and
so it looks like the Jupiter is making
like this weird scurve and they couldn't
explain that if the Earth is the center
of the solar system except that they
added on what are called epicycles they
added on extra Little Orbits of the
planets in order to account for that
motion that sometimes it appears yes
we're moving bulk motion but then
sometimes it goes in opposite direction
when we're going in the same direction
so smart yeah they and they must have
known by modeling this stuff on Earth
between objects on Earth and that raises
for me anyway uh an important
psychological question so you you've got
um these Dutch folks with Great Glass
yeah they're using that great glass to
correct vision I should say uh sorry
Andre the reason that they had good
glass is they were the some of the
foremost um uh uh explorers right a lot
of the early uh trade and they were uh
what did exploration give them access to
trade so they could get the finest
silicon and glass and they could make it
themselves that's their economics again
capitalism always wins right this is a
lesson that we shouldn't forget their
Commerce their economies allowed them to
do trade and get acquire the best
highest quality materials then that was
used to make the best scientific
equipment and it's just curious it' be
like you know if we they built these
scientific tools but they didn't use
them for science so imagine like
building the large hron collider or or
slack or something like that and and
then not using it you know just like
using it to like measure slack is
sitting empty right basically but it
wasn't originally that's the point right
it was used for something so I so I what
I'm curious about is why do you think it
is
that some humans get some technology in
this case glass yeah and they want to
look at things that are very close up
yeah you know that I'm I like
microscopes a lot I I right now you know
I don't have my wet lab we're still
still involved in some clinical trials
but you know I love microscopes and I
love customizing my microscopes I didn't
like them you know I don't like a
plug-and playay I I I like them sort of
the same way that people like hot rods I
didn't like motorized stages I like
manual stages this kind of thing
nowadays you need motorize stages Etc
but what was I going to invest my money
into it was higher numerical aperture
yes better basically you're able to see
things better right exactly see see
smaller things better that that's what
um numerical aperture will will do for
you so it's like putting more um
horsepower into a car yeah as opposed to
paying more attention to the you know
the the paint job people do that with
their cameras you know they geek out
everyone's got their thing yep humans
have this glass and they have the option
to look at smaller and smaller things or
to resolve their Vision why do you think
it is that a subset of humans because I
think it's a special subset of humans
instead like I want to look at things
really far away yeah you know and you're
one of these humans I mean I Delight in
the stars I Delight in the moon I have
some questions about um that I think
most people have who appreciate sunsets
and moon sets and things like that um
but why do you think it is that it tends
to be a small subset of people who don't
just want to appreciate the night sky
but want to figure this stuff out that
is so far away
I'll be honest it never occurred to me
I'm curious about things deep under the
ocean I am very I'm very interested in
fish and and Aquatic Life and but I I
like terrestrial things arboreal things
things and trees and um and I think most
people uh Orient to the uh the stuff
that's more of this planet yeah what do
you think it is I I realize you're not a
psychologist and there's probably no um
DSM whatever six diagnosis specific for
this but but is I'll I just ask you for
you was it a desire to better understand
life here on Earth or was it a desire to
kind of leave life here on Earth I think
it's a ladder I mean my my childhood was
you know pretty tumultuous I think you
and I have a lot things in common both
fathers you know scientists and you know
phys physics and math in my case um very
hard driving very hard to live up to
their their their Shadows that they cast
for example um at least in my case um uh
and and you seem to have a you know just
a beautiful Rel ship with your dad now
but I'm sure it wasn't always like that
talked about that we did a lot of repair
work and I'm very grateful for where
we're at and and I encourage anyone son
daughter mother father whatever
relationship the the repair work to the
extent that it's possible is absolutely
worth it yeah and that episode you I
texted you is a real gift not only you
know for for all of us who got to you
know witness it but also you know for
grandchildren him you know his legacy
and so forth and even you know his mom
your your your your dad's uh wife and
and your mom but but the the point is I
yes it transported me I was living
through after the divorce of my parents
I lived with my stepfather um who had
adopted us changed our names moveed to
different you know we were changing you
know schools every couple of years and
that discovery of the you know Moon next
to Jupiter it was sort of like solving a
puzzle and there's a famous saying by
you know Albert Michaelson who was the
first Nobel Prize winner in American
history um for what physics sorry
Michael and Morley um he proved in some
sense that the Earth is not moving
through the ether you know that was
hypothesized by by luminaries beforehand
but but the point was when um when a
child does a like solves a puzzle like
you would think well like an adult you
solve a Rubik's Cube okay I did it once
I don't have to do it again but like my
son keep doing it keep like showing off
can I get it faster video game same
thing once you solve the you don't just
like throw it out and stop doing it you
get a taste of that thrill of Discovery
yes it's diminished and yes we become
inured to it as we get older and and a
little bit more you know there's just
things we have to get you know take care
of in life and especially as a professor
scientist you know you can't like Marvel
over the same things you did when you
first did these experiments but as an
experiment you get transported and you
get to you know encounter something that
you feel like no one has ever done
before for example when I got my first
telescope that night you know a couple
of months after discovering this you I
looked through it and I saw the same
features on the moon and I have a 3D
printed Moon that my son made you know
to show you um and it has all the
craters represented on it's so cool um
and I saw the exact same craters on the
moon that Galileo saw and then I looked
at V at Jupiter and when you look at
Jupiter you not only see these beautiful
atmospheric bands on it and I brought
you a telescope as your you know as your
end of the year holiday gift uh it's
yours to keep and no money uh no no
money down and King brand for and uh and
I looked at Jupiter and when you look at
Jupiter as I hope you'll do tonight or
with your crew later on um you will see
not only the planet not only its little
atmospheric Stripes maybe even the Great
Red Spot which is amazing three times
bigger than the earth you can see it
from Earth with this little telescope I
got you but you see four little stars
and there four stars that are to the
left to the right they're in a plane
with the midpoint of these equatorial
storms that are Brewing on Jupiter for
four we know that they've been going on
for at least 400 years because Galileo
saw them so that sets a limit a m you
know minimum storms when you say storms
what are these stem they are enormous
hurricanes on the planet and the equator
bands like the Tropic of Cancer and the
Tropic of Capricorn so there's plenty of
water up there that's raining down not
water at all it's methane ammonia uh but
it's a fluid so it behaves like a fluid
doesn't so you have these swirling
whirls and the colors will Amaze you
you'll see colors on an astronomical
object it's going to blow your mind and
not only is it going to blow your mind
because you're doing you're G to feel
unique in all of science you will feel
what Galileo felt you won't know that he
felt it before you a billion people have
seen it since then because for you it's
new and for you you're viscerally
connected to the Maestro to Galileo and
what he did there's no other branch of
science that's like that you can't look
at the at the higs B on first of all no
one person to team of 3,700 people that
discovered the higs B on and seven
people predicted the higs BOS on higs is
just one of them one of my professors up
around was another one Jer ground that
he passed away unfortunately never won
the no prize but but the point is you
can't know what that felt like you can't
know what it felt like to discover
gravitation waves because thousands of
people did it recently in 2015 but the
question of visceral connection to the
first discover of that phenomena it's
Unique to astronomy I I don't know of
another branch of science where you can
have that and best of all from here in
the center of La you can see the same
craters you can see these four Galilean
they're called the Galilean moons of
Jupiter and uh we're sending spacecraft
there now to see if they have life on it
it's incredible Andrew there's nothing
else like that in all of science for $50
to $60 have a list on my website Brian
king.com I have a telescope buyer guide
that I sent to people I don't make any
money from it it's just I love to share
science with the public just like you
but in my case it's astronomy and for
$50 or $75 you can have this experience
that Galileo had it's it's an awesome
feeling and I think that's what kept me
going it distracted me from the the
Pains of you know the life that I had at
that time and you know just struggling
as most pre-teens and teenagers did um
you know but uh to answer your question
that you asked 20 minutes ago it was
really to to transport teleport exactly
the opposite of the telescope I really
felt like I was transported to these
other worlds and I could that I could
understand them with simple math and
simple tools night after night they were
reliable Companions and that people love
to see it you'll see Saturn hopefully
with it you can't help but feel this is
you know amazing it's thrilling and it
allows you to do science with your eyes
connected to your mind it's it's
incredible so it sounds to me like you
were thank you for sharing that by the
way the way it sounds like you were able
to
connect to places distant in space
obviously yeah and time yeah
Galileo that's beautiful I I don't think
the same experience occurs when one
looks down the microscope I it's true
that the the greatest neurobiologist of
all time by a long shot um was Ramon
kahal right Supernatural levels of
ability to understand what turned out to
be the correct function of the nervous
system just from anatomical specimens
but when I look down the microscope and
I see a even a kahal rsus cell there's a
cell named after uh after him um you
don't really feel a connection to him in
the same way although that the neurons
are beautiful but you don't it's not the
same the way that you describe what's
great about science in general is that
the best science is apolitical but I
always say look there's no such thing as
like oh that constellation is a
democratic constellation oh you see that
asteroid that's a rep no it's it's a it
is a safe space I think we do need safe
spaces and at best science is a safe
space not meaning it never interacts
with politics because of course it does
but but for those moments we we as
humans and you know this better than I
do we need to we need recovery you can't
just work out you don't work out seven
days a week you work out six days a week
or whatever it's still more than six
more than I work out but but the point
is we need to recover as much as we need
to pay attention to to to the activity
we need to recover pay attention to that
too um and so the question is where can
we recover from social media from
politics from economic stress and all I
think science is an ideal vehicle for it
it should be apolitical we shouldn't be
you know always concerned with you know
politics or what's happening on social
media and I'm guilty of this too I'm I'm
you know certainly spending way too much
time on screens but but the point being
science can be that and astronomy in
particular like I said it's apolitical
it is safe to let your mind run to what
you used to do when you were on a dorm
with your Bros at you know 3:00 a.m.
just bsing right we don't get a chance
to do that when you're thinking about
mortgage payments and like who's taking
the kids tomorrow and and all these
different you know quotidian things as I
say we need to get back to that more
more than ever I feel pondering the
origins of life and connecting to people
um who existed thousands of years before
us that's right do you think that
Galileo cernus um and
others were doing the exact same thing
that there were there was a bit of an
escapism to it healthy escapism as
opposed to trying to solve the the
position of the plets and and understand
ourselves um for some other reason
definitely yeah I mean Gallo in
particular is sort of this tragic figure
in some ways you know he he had the
first Notions and application of the
scientific method as I said using an
apparatus to confirm a hypothesis
iterating on that so I said when he saw
the moon he saw these craters and
valleys and Rifts and lava fields that
you'll see tonight again people you can
buy a telescope on Amazon $50 and you'll
see the same things that he saw and you
can connect it to your iPhone and post
it on Instagram if you want and I hope
you'll do that that's your only homework
assignment the only one I'm going to
assign to you as a professor so I want
you to take a picture of uh the craters
on the moon but the point is you'll see
the exact same things from New York City
you can see them from the middle of
London it doesn't matter where you are
if you have a clear sky and the moon is
out you'll see the same thing but when
you look at Jupiter you'll see these
four dots and here's where Galileo just
had this otherworldly intellect that you
know when I saw those I was like oh cool
it's next to some star until I realized
I had to do more research that those are
actually the moons of Jupiter so in one
night tonight you can you know quadruple
the number of moons you've ever seen in
your life and some of those moons are
almost the size of our moon arm moon is
unusually large um and and those moons
sometimes they'll cast Shadows on the
planet so there'll be an eclipse you'll
witness an eclipse on Jupiter on another
planet with this $50 instrument or
whatever okay um when he was observing
these things he would would do things
that were not only Psych iCal and they
were therapeutic for him in his later
years I'll explain that in a minute he
ended up going blind and and so losing
the sight you know kind of the
Recollections that he had and he lost
his daughter who was a nun because he
was she was illegitimate as most of I
think all of his kids except maybe one
oldest one he had Mistresses he was
never he was married divorced basically
and I was kind of like he was Catholic
in Italy Pro you know primordial Italy
basically it didn't exist as a country
but he was in Tuscany and uh he had a
lot of challenges he was almost always
broke broke even when he invented the
his version of the telescope again he
didn't invent the telescope but he made
it so much better 10x it 20x it you know
zero to one and it was incredible what
he did with it he realized I this is
great and all for me to discover these
cool things and learn about the universe
he was deeply religious too um but I got
to make money I got to pay for my house
he had like Bard imagine like your
students at Stanford are living with you
because that's the only way you can
afford to pay rent in your I mean and
you're cooking meals for them and
they're like slobs right I mean like I
was a slob in in college right so the
point is he had bills to pay and he was
a businessman he realized well look if I
if I start making these telescopes
everybody will see the things that I'm
seeing I won't have any monopolistic
advantage over you know Kepler who is
his friend but also his competitor um
they were they were you know really V
vying for for who is the best astronomer
of all time Kepler in Germany and and
obviously Galo in Italy well become
Italy and um and he realized Kepler was
purely theoretical he had great math
chops he came up with functions for the
orbits of planets before Isaac Newton
proved that they came from calculus and
universal gravitation incredible
scientist but if he gave that it was
like giving a you know a free particle
accelerator to your arch competitors
right he didn't do that he said no I'm
not going to make these telescopes but
I'm gonna I'm GNA sell them only to the
government and they're going to pay me
because these are great military devices
and you don't we don't think of them now
but with it he went he's so brilliant he
was so charming and charismatic he said
I'm not I'm not only going to like sell
you these things first he went to the
senate in in Venice the Venetian Senate
the Doge the original Doge we think doge
is a coin or some Department that elon's
GNA head no no it was the Doge was like
the the the the chief of the government
back in the venetians which was one of
the most wealthy countries in all of all
of Europe it was separate from Tuscany
and separate from Rome and he went there
and he said uh you are a maritime Pro
you have you ever been to Venice mhm
it's beautiful right so he said look
come with me I'm going to take you up
into the Piaza San Marco go up to the
tower and we're going to look out and
we're going to see there's a ship out
there but you can't see it with your
naked eye but if I give you the
telescope you can see it three days
earlier before it comes into your Harbor
that's like you have an F35 you know
stealth fighter and you you sell the
rights to turn off the stealth portion
of it to your adversary it's incredibly
valuable it's a time portal yes you know
you can tell I'm keep harping on this
theme of you know the ability to see
things at greater distance that's right
uh at higher and higher resolution gives
you a a window into time exactly and we
that now that um has enormous Advantage
there there because of you know the
trajectory of the ship you actually are
getting a a sort of crystal ball into
the into what's going to happen later
the future whereas looking at at
position of the Stars some anticipation
of of what's going to happen based on
historical charts of the stars and we
can speak of that now and I come to
think of it as you're saying it light
years what is a lightyear it's a
measurement of distance but it's in
terms of time so it's exactly what
consonant with what you're saying we we
are always going to have this
combination and this interrelation this
this you know uh competition between
things in space and things in time and
he realized with this tube that he could
see to Great distances that also
afforded him this extra Advantage when
it came to predicting the future as you
say if we could do a top Contour survey
of the greats of
astronomy um where would it start
starting with who people who got it
wrong yeah and then we and then correct
each other like we if we were going to
do a fast uh a fast Sprint through these
yeah uh where would we start well you'd
have to start with like you know Gog or
whatever you know the first cavemen and
women you know as I said the 40 charting
stars on the wall exactly we don't know
who they are telling their their
youngsters like okay you know because
those stars are there relative to that
Ridge or that Etc days are getting
longer days are getting shorter that's
right ergo hunt now Ergo collect stuff
to hunker down um maybe even um don't
reprodu now maybe even behavioral
restraint 100% maybe reproduce now yeah
yeah it's going to be much more you know
optimal time for exactly so tens of
thousands pre- Antiquity you would say
then the I would say fast forward you
know to the maybe uh Egyptian Epoch you
know 5,000 BC so to speak when they had
a also a very uh
zodicalcandy that's
I think it's less controversial
Stonehenge than the pyramids the
pyramids seem to be like almost you know
they lead people into thinking about
aliens and all what what do you think of
is it I mean given their their mass
given their location given what we knew
about populations then and given what we
know about the strength of people and
the tools they had at the time is it
reasonable to assume that people built
these things I I mean certainly I mean
you'd have to convince me that people
didn't build them but exactly how they
built it is is is a great question I
mean so for example I mentioned this
when I was on Joe Rogan's show I said
you know if you measure the bases of the
pyramids it turns out that there a ratio
of a cubit which is uh actually cubits
not Quantum bits like you and your dad
talked about but but uh cubits is the
length of the pharaoh's forearm it's
basically a foot and a half roughly so
back then if you were like the president
you were also the metric standard for
all of civilization wild it makes it's
sort of like uh models on Instagram
right everyone's trying to attain these
what's the standard that's right exactly
wow so the phoh forearm is this and is
this about carrying carrying items yeah
well was just for length or like a foot
we talk about a foot it was a Pharaoh's
foot yeah that's where we get those from
right so there was only kind of one
rough standard for calibration which is
incredibly important for removing
systematic effects in science in general
so you had a calibration standard now we
have like a bar of platinum we've
defined you know the second in terms of
oscillations of a of a certain atom
called cesium and how many times it Ates
per per second sure a degree right yeah
a calorie right so now we want to define
those in terms of physical quantities
not in terms of people um and so doing
that has has been a great Advance
forward in science and we've only
recently gotten rid of what are called
artifacts so it used to be there was a
rod that was one meter long and the
meter was originally defined as um
69,000 I I forget of the distance from
the North Pole to Paris but that
obviously depends on assuming the Earth
is a perfect sphere which it's not right
chubby around the middle yeah right bulg
is because it's it's an oblate Spirit
right exactly um and so all these things
that were relics uh we want to get rid
of them and tie them to fundamental
properties of say a Quantum system
that's very pure and we can isolate it
we don't want to use a Pharaoh's foot
either so we we have to come with a link
standard so now we use the speed of
light times the second and we can Define
things in those terms but back then yeah
so they didn't know that but I told Joe
as I said if you measure the base of all
the the Great Pyramids of Giza they're
all multip of a cubit uh times so many
numbers of the number Pi so like but Pi
wasn't known to them you know Pi wasn't
known to be irrational until the Greeks
um in uh in uclid proved that it was
irrational um uh and that you know it
didn't come from a computational it
couldn't easily be obtained from it it
had an infinite number of digits right
so how did these Egyptians know that an
alien told them no the way they did it
is they laid it out they used a surveyor
tool one of the surveyor tool is a stick
with a on it so the wheel's a circle so
you got so many multiples they just
counted and that's how so we confuse a
lot of things they stumbled into Pi
exactly right they walked all over so
you don't have to always posit
Supernatural explanations for things the
answer is simply we don't know I
certainly don't know how Stone engine
was built nor how do I know how the
pyramids were built um but it's not you
would have to convince me that it was
built by some other means other than
people and the tools that were available
to them likewise I'm not I'm not
convinced it came from extraterrestrial
I don't remember how we got on this but
um so we were marching through so we
were marching through um so we have the
our ancient ancestors and then what
point did we get to um kernus in Gala uh
then it was uh yeah then it was cernus
who had ideas but couldn't prove them he
had no data to substantiate the capern
or sun centered model of the universe
which is also by the way you know almost
everything in science is wrong right
cernic is wrong the sun is not the
center of the solar system right there
there's the center of our solar system
is inside the sun because the planets
orbit around it and they orbit around an
elliptical pattern which has two fosi so
he belied that the the orbits were all
circles so he's wrong but he's more
right than Aristotle so that's why
science progresses right Newton was
right about gravity until uh he was
wrong when Einstein proved him wrong
right so then you come up to um after
him Kepler discovered the laws of the
elliptical motion of planets and um and
and their patterns that we still use we
discovered an exoplanet my my colleague
David Kipping I want to introduce you to
to uh he's discovered exomoons these are
moons around other planets some of which
are in the habitable zone of their host
star and some of them have sun-like
stars and are earth-sized planets it's
incredible there could be as I said a
link between life evolving on Earth due
to the moon on our planet so too on an
exoplanet it could require an exomoon
which he's discovered or thinks he has
he's actually very cautious and hasn't
said it explicitly so Kepler's laws
underpin all those discoveries even to
this day 400 years later then Galileo
immediately afterwards with the
telescope phases of Venus uh that only
occur if the Earth is not the center of
the solar system the rings of Saturn he
he had Notions about those he
accidentally discovered the planet
Neptune it's amazing um and then he uh
of course the moons of Jupiter falsified
the notion that the Earth is the center
of the solar system because these moons
are going around Jupiter not around the
earth so that's completely torpedoed the
notion of the true nature of the
Aristotelian or t
uh Earth centered cosmology then uh soon
after that uh astronomers measured
things like the speed of light um using
eclipses of the moons of Jupiter uh they
measured distances to Saturn they they
mapped out the solar system and then
from there using Parallax you know you
can kind of gauge the triangulation and
using trigonometry measure the structure
of our galaxy uh William hersel and his
uh sister Caroline hsel was the first uh
female astronomer first female scientist
she was the first person to use the
scientific method did and become a
fellow of the Royal Society in in Great
Britain um and then later off after that
we come to the era of the the last you
know kind of U the big developments in
technology were photographic plates
after that spectrographs dispersion of
light onto photographic material you
could preserve your memory you didn't
use sketches like Galileo did and then
up until Hubble when Hubble discovered
two major things which was one was that
the Milky Way was a Galaxy it wasn't the
entire universe there were other
galaxies Island universes of billions of
stars and then he discovered the
expansion of the universe with help from
astronomer who doesn't get a lot of
attention a lot of the women in
astronomy uh got really short shrift um
people discovered how Fusion works in
the sun women Carol um g gapas spaan at
Harvard and then Henrietta levit um who
who measured this relationship between
the size and brightness of objects
called seiad variables that Hubble then
used to make his law that proved that
the universe is expanding and then after
that people like penes and Wilson
discovering the uh microwave and radio
astronomy Robert jansky all the way up
until you know my colleagues today some
of them I've interviewed um Adam Ree and
and Brian Schmidt and uh Barry barish he
wrote the forward to my my second book
um detecting gravitational waves the
accelerating expansion of the universe
due to Dark Energy first Nobel Prize in
astronomy 2011 uh followed up 2015
discovery of 2017 discovered
gravitational waves from inspiring black
hole
you know there's so many and there's so
many you I've been blessed to know many
of them and I have them as my academic
you know pedigree I'd like to take a
quick break and thank one of our
sponsors function I recently became a
function member after searching for the
most comprehensive approach to lab
testing while I've long been a fan of
blood testing I really wanted to find a
more in-depth program for analyzing
blood urine and saliva to get a full
picture of my heart health my hormone
status my immune system regulation my
metabol function my vitamin and mineral
status and other critical areas of my
overall health and vitality function not
only provides testing of over a 100
biomarkers key to physical and mental
health but it also analyzes these
results and provides insights from to
doctors on your results for example in
one of my first tests with function I
learned that I had two high levels of
mercury in my blood this was totally
surprising to me I had no idea prior to
taking the test function not only helped
me detect this but offered medical
doctor inform formed insights on how to
best reduce those mercury levels which
included limiting my tuna consumption
because I'd been eating a lot of tuna
while also making an effort to eat more
leafy greens and supplementing with
Knack and acetylcysteine both of which
can support glutathione production and
detoxification and worked to reduce my
mercury levels comprehensive lab testing
like this is so important for health and
while I've been doing it for years I've
always found it to be overly complicated
and expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the tests done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function health.com huberman function
currently has a weight list of over
250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to hubman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to function
today's episode is also brought To Us by
Helix sleep helix sleep makes mattresses
and pillows that are customized to your
unique sleep needs now I've spoken many
times before on this and other podcasts
about the fact that getting a great
night's sleep is the foundation of
mental health physical health and
performance now the mattress you sleep
on makes a huge difference in the
quality of sleep that you get each night
how soft that mattress is or How firm it
is how breathable it is all play into
your comfort and need to be tailored to
your unique sleep needs so if you go to
the Helix website you can take a brief
two-minute quiz that asks you questions
such as do you sleep on your back your
side or your stomach do you tend to run
hot or cold during the night things of
that sort maybe you know the answers to
those questions maybe you don't either
way Helix will match you to the ideal
mattress for you for me that turned out
to be the dusk mattress D us I started
sleeping on a dusk mattress about three
and a half years ago and it's been Far
and Away the best sleep that I've ever
had so much so that when I travel to
hotels and airbnbs I find I don't sleep
as well I can't wait to get back to my
dusk mattress so if you'd like to try
Helix you can go to helixsleep.com
take that 2-minute sleep quiz and Helix
will match you to a mattress that's
customized for your unique sleep needs
right now Helix is giving up to 25% off
all mattress orders again that's
helixsleep.com
huberman to get up to 25% off maybe you
can help me here I've never heard a
description of the of the origin of life
in the universe that made a lot more
sense to me past there were a bunch of
big explosions a bunch of the elements
and stuff that you needed uh came
together and then uh at some point there
was water and at some point there were
Critters that moved and then
multicellular organisms like what am I
missing here I mean I'm I'm a I'm a I'm
a man of science and I love science but
why can't I can grasp it when it's told
to me but why is it that um it's so hard
maybe I'm just not smart enough to
comprehend this idea that a bunch a star
exploded dot dot dot and here we are I
think it's obvious why why you have this
particular Affliction and that's because
you're used to doing experiment you're a
scientist your core identity one of your
core identities is a scientist right and
you think of things scientifically and
as I said before the Scientific Method
as we practice it is based on you know
hypothesis observation experimentation
iteration right well think about this if
I study if I have a hypothesis that um
you know that certain people can um can
detect sunspots right so I want to have
a control group and I want to have a
variable right so I want to be able to
contrast and see if it's statistically
significant right I want to pack right
so what do I have to do then well I have
to control the number of sunspots okay
sorry I'm not you know you used to say
you weren't around at the creation you
know the design meeting for human beings
I wasn't consulted at the design phas
and by the way when Brian says pcking
packing is people tinkering with the
numbers or the experiment or the
hypothesis after the data are in in
order to try and establish statistical
significance which and by the way p is
isid not just not good it's bad it's
it's it's cheating of a uh it's not
making up data but it's tweaking the
experimental design um in hopes that
you'll get something where you probably
didn't it's not good you don't want to
do it your colleague at Stanford weo ens
won the Nobel prize in economics in
2021 and he's done tremendous amount of
work in this and you know confounding
variables pcking where do these things
manifest themselves in physics well high
temperature super conductors this goes
back to the late 80 I remember
graduating from high school there was a
discovery of room temperature what's
called cold fusion that was one thing
that create also Limitless energy too
cheap to meter from just using hydrogen
and from seawater and Palladium uh and
platinum um that turned out to be bogus
and it turned out to be the data were
manipulated in such a way that we would
say probably fall into the realm of
pcking which may not have been
maliciously intended but the goal the
output of it is certainly you know a
driving in that influences people to do
things that are unethical and and that
happens at all levels and we we saw I
saw it in my own experiment um not
necessarily accusing my colleagues of
being unethical we were searching and we
still are searching for what caused the
Big Bang we're going to get back to your
question of how this comes because I
think I can I can help that plate still
spinning in the backgound like a planet
it's spinning like our solar system
right uh but the um the the the Quarry
was so big to unravel what caused the
Big Bang to what ignited the spark that
became our universe it's at least it was
called when we announced the Discovery
at Harvard um on on uh St Patrick's Day
2014 uh world news covered a front page
everywhere New York Times Sienna every
single outlet covered it it was called
one of the greatest discoveries of all
time not only did it uh explain how our
universe came into existence it also
predicted the existence of other
universes and what's called the
Multiverse which we've heard about maybe
in Quantum Computing most people heard
on the joog exactly right that's right
among many things that we hear about
only on that show so the the point is um
it was it was an a quarry for the ages
and I knew that because that's why I
invented the experiment right I told you
my father and I you know we never really
had the reproach mon that you and your
father seem to have had and that's great
um we always had kind of a difficult
relationship as I said he abandoned me
in my book I write about this rather um
he abanded me and my older brother Kevin
at I was seven he was 10 and he you know
just left us and because of that he
didn't end up you know paying child
support for me or my my brother and
alimony to my mother and so my
stepfather adopted us and my last name
was originally not keing it was axe ax
um and so uh when we adopted I never saw
him I didn't see him for 15 years but I
knew one thing he was uh a brilliant
scientist and he was actually the
youngest he was he was not only a 10e
professor he was full Professor with
like a chair at Cornell at age 26 so you
and I got our professor like our 30s or
whatever I was 40 when I got tenure yeah
I mean it's it's like a much he was 26 2
it was a math it was a little bit
different but I knew he won basically
there's no Nobel Prize in mathematics
there's the fields medal which is kind
of equivalent at some level but almost
nobody knows about it it's only given
every five years you have to be under 40
whatever he never won that but he won
like the prize just beneath that if you
will called the cold PR um a remarkable
scientist got into incredible
discoveries in mathematics and physics
and I knew one thing he never won the
Noble Prize so as some kids might
compete with their father who's a you
know captain of the high school football
team and they want to be the captain of
the college foot very competitive boys
can be competitive with their Dads right
you know that and I want to compete with
him but he wasn't an athlete I wasn't an
athlete I can compete with him and do
what he could not do which was win a
Nobel Prize and I was arange from him
and I was like I'm going to win a Nobel
Prize and I'll show him you know and
he'll regret that he abandoned me and
gave me up for adoption this is my
thought Pro I'm not I'm not saying it's
like the most elevated way to be but
that's the way I thought of it so I said
I have to invent something discover
something that's worthy of a prize
that's all I have to do quote unquote
how hard can it be there's been hundreds
of Nobel prizes given out these that's
the way you thought about I was at
Stanford and you're surrounded by Noble
you know what it's like I was a postto
at Stanford uh for a short time we can
get into that and uh and and the point
was I was obsessed with discovering or
inventing an experiment that could take
us back to the primordial Universe
before what we call the big bang the Big
Bang is not the origin of time and space
it's the origin of the first elements in
the periodic table of the element we
still don't know what caused that event
to occur and I realized that if we
discovered what caused that event to
occur which is hypothesized uh to be uh
a phenomenon called inflation which was
co-created by uh uh at least three
scientists but but two of whom were at
Stanford associate with Stanford Alan
Guth who's now at MIT he was a postto at
slack and Andre Lind who's a you know
renowned professor at at Stanford to
this day so uh they predicted that there
was this mysterious substance called a
Quantum field and that the fluctuations
in this Quantum field existing in a
four-dimensional Infinite Space uh the
random fluctuations of a Quantum field
NE what's called vacuum energy is
unstable you can't have what's called
vacuum or negative energy and have it
just sit there permanently it eventually
inexorably must fluctuate and the
fluctuations can actually spawn an uh an
expansion of that four-dimensional space
locally and that occurred at a specific
time when you say four-dimensional space
can you toss the axis of that space so
you can think of as ordinary
threedimensional space but imagine uh X
Y and Z extend to Infinity in all
directions and we're sitting at our
local uh what we perceive as the center
of our universe it's just our observable
universe we can look out 90 billion
light years in any direction which is
longer than the age of the universe
times the speed of light uh that's
because the universe has been expanding
in addition to having existed for 14
billion years it's been expanding for
for that uh an additional power of three
times that um and then imagine time so
time is a fourth component and we have
to weave those together in order to
understand how objects behave in this in
this landscape of of what we call the
cosmos but it wasn't limited to just our
what we now see is our universe we have
a horizon just like if you go off in to
the Pacific Ocean here away from Land uh
you see a horizon it's a circular
Horizon in all directions so we live on
a threedimensional planet right the
Horizon is two- dimensional it's it's
one dimensional Circle uh that we can
see any ship that's above the Horizon we
can see
visible light coming from it right but
we we can perceive that there are things
on the other side of the planet that we
can't see and we have to learn about
those they indirect methods can talk
about that different time so there's a
horizon on a three-dimensional surface
that's a onedimensional surface in four
dimensions it's a two-dimensional
surface so you kind of lose two
dimensions and that means it's a sphere
it looks like our universe looks like a
sphere centered on us we look in all
directions we see constellations we see
galaxies we see clusters of galaxies and
we go farther than back you see this
primordial heat that's left over from
the formation of the elements that's
called The Cosmic micro background
radiation that's what I study its
properties and what it reveals it's the
oldest light in the universe the oldest
possible light it was once visible you
could see it if you existed uh but
nobody existed back then um and it
originates from the formation of the
lightest elements and the and the
lightest atoms on the periodic table so
you could look back and if you could see
this you would see a pattern imprinted
on that light called called
gravitational radiation or waves of
gravity and that would be evidence of
something beyond the visible Horizon and
that would actually originate from this
inflationary Epoch if it occurred so I
had the idea to build the first
telescope a refracting telescope of all
things just a telescope with lenses but
lenses that are transparent to
microwaves and focus microwaves but I
realized I could build that telescope
and if we were successful I didn't think
we wasn't guaranteed to be successful
but it was a big enough scientific Quest
that it was guaranteed to win a Nobel
Prize if we were correct and in fact you
know spoiler alert my first book is
called losing the Nobel Prize because we
had a retracted discovery that we made
at Harvard on on uh St Patrick's Day
2014 10 years ago so you had a paper
that essentially um LED you to the like
realistic possibility that you might win
the Nobel Prize and then you and then
you had to retract it um do you recall
your state of emotional state or state
of mind when you realize that you were
wrong very clear and that's that's how
it relates to this packing and
everything
um we actually didn't have this paper
peer reviewed we were so concerned that
a competitor uh which is a spacecraft a
billion dollar spacecraft we were just
A1 million Doll Experiment a little
telescope at the South Pole Antarctica
where I've been a couple times and that
instrument bested a scientific telescope
led by thousand people costing a billion
dollars Led Out of You Know multiple
countries in America and Europe and we
were terrified as many scientists are
that we're going to get scooped in fact
the the original discovery of the cosmic
microwave background was made by
accident the discovery of this 3 Kelvin
heat Source that's coming to us in all
directions IAT a background was made by
accident at Bell Laboratories and Bell
Labs accidentally discovered it because
they were looking at the very first
communication satellites you know AT&T
Bell Labs a communication so they
stumbled on it they accidentally said
I'm looking at the satellite that should
have a certain amount of uh background
hiss noise whatever that was expected
but I'm getting hundreds of times that
amount and where could that be coming
from they did very excruciating very
high Precision measurements and they
found they couldn't identify a single
terrestrial Source or a cosmic Source um
of any other sort except for the fact
that if the universe began essentially
with a big bang they didn't call it that
back then that there would be a
pervasive heat left over that would be
exactly this temperature 3 degrees above
absolute zero 3 degrees Kelvin so I knew
if they want a Nobel Prize certainly I'd
win a Nobel Prize for discovering why
that effect happened right it's like you
discover you know some amino acids
and then you discover well it's produced
by DNA well certainly you know if the
amino acid won the Nobel Prize certainly
DNA would win the Nobel preber dad
Arthur cornberg RNA uh son um you know
structure of RNA so you publish a paper
that wasn't peer-reviewed because you
were worried about getting scooped
scooped is when someone else beats you
to publication um folks and um gets
credit for the discovery it's a whole
discussion that we could have some other
time if we we just want to Riff on the
process of science but um so you
published the paper yeah we didn't
publish it we we submitted it to the
archive we had a press conference at
Harvard Center for astrophysics and and
uh space sciences and uh and it was
televised and in the audience were Nobel
laurates and and reporters but the
discovery that you know was clear that
we would have won it however at that
time I had been removed from the
leadership of the experiment that I
created so I created the predecessor
experiment you know it's like iPhones
you build one then you upgrade it you
build a better camera build so the first
one I invented when I was a postto at
Stanford it was called bicep and it
stood for background imager of cosmic
extragalactic polarization and it's also
kind of a play on words because the
pattern of microwave polarization which
we can talk about uh was a twisting
curling uh pattern so I made the pun
like curl like you do bicep the muscle
behind curls anyway it's not that funny
and and they ended up trying to change
the acronym which pissed me off but uh
but anyway uh the the the tragic thing
is that um we built this experiment we
upgraded this experiment it's very hard
to get money uh to build it I got money
from David Baltimore who's the president
of Caltech uh I should say I was at
Stanford I should say about David
Baltimore just because people might want
to go to uh former president of Cal Tech
maybe still Rockefeller no former
president of the Rockefeller that's an
interesting story um if you want to look
it up you know look it up as they say
scientists are are human um he landed at
Caltech so they funded you to do this he
gave me a special uh
Grant just presidential this called
Caltech presidence fund he gave it to me
and my postto adviser Andrew Lang was
incredible scientist he was married to
Francis Arnold who won the Nobel Prize
in in 2018 in chemistry renowned
scientist uh as well and they were just
power couple and he uh invited me to
give a talk and I gave a job talk he
hired me on the spot I couldn't you know
help myself from saying yes before he
finished this I was miserable at
Stanford by the way it was 1999 2000.
boom I was making $32,000 a year living
on Alma Street the Cal trains were
running every 17 minutes I know because
I was awake from 5:00 a.m. you know I
couldn't sleep more than four four or 5
hours and I I just said yes moved down
to Caltech and because of that I
convinced him and my colleague Jamie
Bach who's currently a professor to
build this telescope and put it at the
South Pole in Antarctica and that was
the only place we could do it and the
only the only University that would fund
it was this this gift from David
Baltimore's presidential fund so these
confidence of events and by the way then
because I had this job and because I
built this telescope with my colleagues
I got the job at UCSD which then enabled
me to meet my wife so let me uh
incredible story you move down to
Caltech which is in Pasadena amazing
place and then you get the money how
much was this initial one was a million
dollars to build a first version okay
that's quite a quite a gift for a postto
um million bucks you you decide the
South Pole will be the place to do it we
can talk about why that is and then you
make this discovery which turns out to
be false yeah so um but it sounds like
you have uh good feelings about the
experience nonetheless so be because I
was recognized and this experiment got a
lot of attention because it was the
really the first one ever designed to
look for the spark that ignited the
whole big bang so it became you know
just the cause celebra of the cosmology
field and are you thinking at this point
forgive me for playing therapist here
I'm not one I'm not pretending to it's
fine um were you thinking at this point
okay you know this challenge that I
think not all but a lot of sons have
with their with their fathers not
necessarily best of them but one
evaluates um themselves relative to like
their family lineage sometimes it's a
grandfather this thing of having some um
internal friction in order to live up to
something yeah sounds like that was
driving you when Tiger Woods and another
Standford right same same story but
father hard pushing driving and then
what does he do after he you know is a
PGA Champion he wants to like become a
Navy SEAL or something like he was
hanging out with a lot of seal it wasn't
enough for him um so I sorry I
interrupted your question so at the
point where you made this discovery were
you were you feeling like all right
check that box um what was kind of
revelatory to me is that sometimes you
start a quest or you start a journey and
the fuel that gets you going it's no
longer serves you when you get there you
know my brother always says you know
baggage has handles so you can put it
down nice so that like Journey from
initiating it um the experiment um to
best my dad to show him up to make him
regret that he abandoned me and my
brother I mean I always said I could I
could see how you banded me I was only
seven I'm kind of boring you know he
used to joke I only care about kids once
they learn calculus he a you what a
cruel thing to say he would say it in
just and and it is true we did reunite
and we did have a reproach M but it was
after inventing this experiment after I
arrived at Caltech it was I mean he was
this kind of intellect and it was so
lovely to see you and your dad you know
my wish for you is is is to have kind of
an experience maybe similar maybe not
but when you do have kids and please God
you will um you get to you you get a
doover you get to kind of correct the
mistakes or the ways that you would and
you'll never get it right you know one
of my friends a psychiatrist he says
your job as a parent is to only pass on
half of your neuroticism to your kids
and if every generation does that you
know will'll eventually be a perfect
species but um but I but I felt that
passion and so forth to kind of best him
and then when we reunited and and it no
it as I said it no longer served me and
but the but the trajectory that I had
launched this experiment on continued
unabated and so that had this inertia
this momentum that couldn't be stopped
in fact so many people wanted a part of
it and so much pressure was surrounding
it that I think you know partially that
led to me actually being kind of kicked
out of the leadership of the experiment
and and that was precipitated by a truly
tragic event so I told you my adviser
Sarah Church um and you know set up a
job interview for me with her adviser
when she was a postu at Caltech named
Andrew Lang Andrew was like a c at that
time I was a stranger my dad he was like
a father figure he was like you know
like you ever see the the TV show madman
like dondre he's just like handsome
good-looking everyone thought he was
going to win a Nobel Prize he was stolen
from Berkeley they spent tons of money
to recruit him from you know from
Berkeley to come to Caltech he only
can't you know his wife was a power
couple Francis Arnold again she won the
Nobel Prize a few years ago and um he
just had the world at his fingertips
Charming funny and and he would say
things like you know Brian this is so
unrealistic that we have to do it like
he was a kid he loved to play and he
loved he's the one who inspired me in
this in this way of just never stopping
like that passionate curiosity and the
reward that you get I always say you
know when you solve a problem your
reward is a harder problem like that's
but that if you're a scientist that
feels good because it's like I always
say and I think it's one of your
colleagues I'm not I'm not sure so much
good stuff going on up there but but uh
there's this concept of finite games and
infinite games right so I would say
science is an infinite game you can't
win science it goes on forever no one
Masters all of whatever science is you
can debate even what it is but it's
composed of an infinite number of finite
games getting into college getting into
graduate school getting a postto getting
a tenure track position those are all
finite games right um and the ultimate
what's the ultimate finite game and
Nobel Prize because only three people
can win it each year there's only 200
people have ever won it you know there's
more people in the NBA than have won it
in physics right so this is an very
exclusive club and if you know if you
win it somebody else isn't going to win
it right like odds are and this pressure
to kind of get to that level uh should
never exceed the passion that drove you
to become a scientist in the first place
and so I was obsessed with that and what
Andrew Lang showed me is that science is
its own reward and the pleasure of
finding things out as you know fan would
say um is its reward science is its own
reward and that's characteristic of
these infinite games you just want to
keep playing them and the tragic thing
is that I'm emotional thinking about
this when Andrew um was at the peak of
his life um he chose to take it he took
his own life he killed himself he killed
himself ironically tragically he used
helium which is uh you know Central to
the formation of the universe and the
creation of our universe is rying in a
large part on helium the abundance of
and he affixiated himself in a in a
cheap dirty sleazy Motel actually I had
stayed at in Pasadena when I was
visiting him for my initial job talk can
I do you mind if we we um go into this a
bit I realize it's a it's a painful
memory and I I feel it um you know not
to shift the the focus but ironically my
all three of my academic advisers Dead
first one shot himself in a bathtub uh
two weeks after we celebrated uh
something for him just like like you
know suicide is such a peculiar thing um
he did it for very different reasons
different stage of life let's get back
to to Lang um how old was he he's 41 I
think so he's young um had three kids
three three son wife still alive yeah
Francis still you know renowned
Professor was she shocked they were
separated they had gotten estranged and
um they weren't living together it was
interesting he was always very close she
had two children I think from previous
marriage or one child from a previous
marriage um and he was like a father to
that son as well like a biological
father or whatever that means um kids
were so dedicated to him and look don't
cry for me I mean I I I still emotional
because he meant so much to me as as a
mentor as a friend as an adviser as as
you know a father figure basically but
he had real kids and he had you know
adopted kids and it was tragic for
everyone suicide is such a peculiar
thing because it in some sense it can um
quote unquote make sense for if somebody
we know is very depressed or they have a
terminal illness you know you know and
and but sounds like it came as a bit of
a surprise do do you think that the um
sometimes there's this close
relationship between genius and um let's
just say not mentally healthy um that
you know even what you mentioned before
you know like we have to try this
experiment I mean there's a bit of
recklessness to that when when dealing
with millions and millions of dollars
and postto careers and you know that
there's a I mean the Delight of a fun
experiment and an adventurous experiment
maybe as a like a a project where you
kind of weigh into it a little bit to
see but that's very different than like
we have to do this there's a risk-taking
element there that that supersedes kind
of my Notions of like what what an
adviser's job is which is to make sure
that people progress toward um to Sure
Discovery but also like you want some um
one of the most important thing to
mentoring scientists is that they have
some sense that there is a future for
them yeah and you can't guarantee it but
you'd like to like a parent would for a
child you want you want to give them
some sense that like the sun's going to
come up tomorrow that's right like we're
not going to implode or explode here and
and he was a he was a pragmatist he
would give me advice life advice you
know and again I was a strange from my
father he was playing this role and he
he was just so he was Charming I he
handsome charismatic he had just
discovered you know came off this
discovery of proving that the Universe
uh has a a flat spatial geometry which
just means that any triangle that you
make in the universe whether it's three
planets three stars three galaxies three
patches of the cosmic microwave
background radiation always the interior
angles add up to 180 degrees as they do
on a flat table here as they did for
uclid and that had astonishing
implications for How the Universe might
have begun and it's still true and this
is still true it's more true than ever
so do you think that um perhaps I mean
who knows um perhaps he committed
suicide because he was um at a at a Peak
you know one of the things that people
talk about is the the peak and trough of
dopamine you mention infinite games you
know that I I said many times before
that um it's very important that you not
get fast large amplitude increases in
dopamine that are not preceded by effort
yeah you methamphetamine will give you a
large amplitude um you know fast
increase in dopamine but it the there's
zero effort involved except to procure
it and it sinks you into a post
dopaminergic Peak trough at afterwards
that um will have you uh hanging on for
for the will to live um so what comes up
goes down and it often goes down further
than it went up when we're talking about
dope I mean playing an infinite game is
great because it's in the it's in the
the motivation to for answers it sounds
like he like hit a peak and you you
wonder if maybe he was like okay now I'm
going to check out now it's going to be
hard to keep doing this I don't think
it's explicable I don't I don't think
you I mean the human brain is the most
complicated thing on you know that human
brains can even contemplate right it's
solipsistic in in a sense but I I
couldn't really wait into it I mean I
know details of his personal life and
yes divorce and separation and and so
forth but but um I I don't think I don't
think that's it just because the the
highs of the new Quest and like the
dopamine hadn't really come in from
bicep and it wouldn't come in for four
more years after his death in 20110 so
you got to continue the project we got
to continue the project but because he
was removed and he was kind of my you
know conly you know whatever I was to
him I forget what how the relationship
goes I'm not as conversing with the
mafia as I should be but but with Andrew
with his death one of the you know
trivial in comparison consequences was
that the main Patron and Backer of me in
my career who would you know helped me
get my job at UCSD had helped me get you
know this this presidential career Grant
which I received from President Bush and
all these incredible accomplishments and
just been my sounding board and
experiments and kept me going and helped
me when I had troubles with my graduates
with students and he would talk to my I
mean it's unheard of right the this
compassion that this man had and if he
had only reached out to to me you know
I'm sure he had better friends than me
but like I would have gone up in a
second you know I I went to the motel
where he took his life when I was
writing my book just to put me back and
like try how could I comprehend it I I
couldn't I just cried I sat in front of
the hotel and I cried but but no I I
don't think we can understand it but but
the eventual High wouldn't come and then
a much more crashing low after we
essentially had a retri it and were
disconfirmed as they say so you
continued with the project yeah I was at
UCSD and I left Caltech you get your job
you got this telescope down at the the
South Pole how do you get to the South
Pole you fly to Chile and then you and
then you you ride a bicycle you know I
never had the the physique to get into
the military although I wanted to at one
point to be a pilot actually I wanted to
go to the Air Force Academy like my
stepfather did but um but I didn't have
the the phys I didn't have the hlp diet
back then uh but the point was um you go
on a military it's a whole way and you
do it in seven days eight days if you're
lucky sometimes it can take three weeks
due to the weather down there it's the
most violent weather most uh winds
turbulence everything you know hostile
but it's a cakewalk compared to the
Explorer Shackleton um or Scott and um
of course aminon so the quest to get to
the South Pole first which is South Pole
I should say for people that aren't
familiar Antarctica is the seventh
continent it's the last one to be
discovered it was only really discovered
it was thought to be there because it
was thought that to balance the the
continents in the northern hemisphere
you needed a massive counterweight in
the southern it's so stupid but anyway
it wasn't discovered till 1900s that
really that they truly existed and then
it wasn't explored until 10 or 12 years
later and the quest to get to the South
Pole it was the last unexplored you know
non-filled in part of the map of the
Earth so the the quest to get there was
like going to the moon and in fact it
exactly parallels the moon in that once
it was reached for the first time nobody
cared to go back again you know for many
many years and we're only going back to
the Moon Now 60 years later 50 years
later after the uh Neil Armstrong and
the Apollo 11 missions right so getting
there and setting that bar right and and
making that accomplishment sometimes
that's the extent of it like when you
have the dopamine head of of being the
first to get somewhere Scott was a
British scientist and an Explorer and
amonson was just an Explorer amonson
roll amonson he tried to get to the
North Pole first he lost somebody else
beat him and he said uh well I'm going
to keep going with this skis and sled
dog team that I have and he literally
went to the South Pole 180 degrees
around so the the poles are the two end
points of the Earth's axis of rotation
there's a North Pole uh there's no land
there there's no continent there there's
ice there and S Santa is there exactly
right uh and then the South Pole is a
continent if you go I brought a piece of
it here that I collected probably
illegally from Antarctica I'll show it
to you later um it's just rocks right so
if you drill under the ice in Antarctica
you come to a continent and that's a
difference between uh the North and
South Poles but the South Pole is uh 700
nautical miles from the coast of
Antarctica the closest point of approach
in the 1900s was you take a ship from
New Zealand you sail toe South there's
no other way to go and you come to the
continental shelf the coastline is
called McMurdo Station which was just
you know basically there's some seal
lines there and that's it and orcas and
Penguins and and nothing else at that
time now there's a whole research
station and and then they got on skis
and skied up 9,000 fet from sea level to
9,000 ft where the polar Plateau
flattens out and they got to the South
Pole and amonson got there 3 weeks
before Scott and Scott was this British
you know naturalist and like a Darwin
but but also he was a scientist plus an
Explorer so he wanted to collect samples
and he found flora and fauna there's not
much rocks meteorites he actually
discovered meteorites in Antarctica
incredible scientist and but because he
was a scientist it cost him his life
because he was carrying all this
scientific equipment and scientific
samples and he had a ski up them like he
would find it and he's like I'm not
coming back the same way that he got
there because of the wind patterns and
stuff so he knew he'd never back so he
couldn't leave it there so he had to
carry extra food Fuel and Men dedicated
to it oh and by the way uh the Norwegian
team ammson was Norwegian and they used
sled dogs for two reasons one they
conserve calories they uh provided
propulsion and then they provided a
tasty snack once you got to the South
Pole because once you get South Pole you
can ski downhill 9,000 feet you know to
sea level basically and so they ate
British would refuse to do that so they
they knew they couldn't eat their dogs
and they had dogs but they they wouldn't
eat them so they were the sled dongs and
when they got to the South Pole they
came within uh 3 or 4 kmet and it's
totally flat like this table the South
Pole looks like this go out in the
middle of the ocean freeze it paint it
white and that's what it looks like it's
white 100 you know 360 Degrees around
okay it's most boring place on Earth
literally and I've been there um he got
within so you can see things really far
away he got there he got within 3
kilometers and he saw something on the
horizon he's like oh you know bleep
right and was a Norwegian flag now can
you imagine Neil Armstrong steps out of
you know the eagle and he lands on a
Soviet flag I mean it would be like the
most crushing it was the most I think
the most depressing moment in human
history to come so far and he actually
said that he said great God this is a a
horrible place and all the more so for
having reached it without the benefit of
priority so the the king and queen they
were depending on him to make the first
you know for for man for you know King
and country right the seeing the
Norwegian flag so what did he do he was
a good scientist he said maybe they made
a mistake maybe they're off by 10t I can
no no they were right the Norwegians got
there first and because he got there
three weeks later in middle of January
by the time he turned around the winds
had died down they were no longer at his
back he was skiing he had no food he
died uh about three weeks later or three
months later in March so his body was
later recovered and it was a you know
wasn't reported back to England for
another six months uh so they gave their
lives for for science for Discovery and
to come up short to be second it must
have been the most crushing defeat in
history W but it happens to be the best
place to do astronomy in the world and
you get there by flying to Santiago
Chile no first you uh first you go to um
Christ Church New Zealand we go to
Auckland LAX Auckland Auckland to Christ
Church and then uh the US uh has a
charter with the New Zealand Air Force
and we give them C130 cargo planes or C
we have our own c17 cargo planes the jet
powered ones unfortunately I got the
c130s which is a four prop plane and uh
I was on a plane that um that had the
entire winter a summer Supply sorry the
entire winter supply of bananas on this
cargo plane which is as big as room this
the cargo hold you know 12 by 12 or you
know times 50 feet long and it was
filled with bananas and at first you're
like oh cool this is great till you
realize there's no bathroom on the plane
there's just a a literally a 5 gallon
bucket and a and a shower curtain there
are no windows on it cuz why do you know
parat ERS need Windows and you know and
uh and then there's enormous crates of
bananas there 12 tons of bananas I have
not touched a banana in 12 years because
of that uh I not missing pottassium or
whatever but but the point is you land
on the coast and then um if you're lucky
you take a flight the next day and it's
a ski plane it's the only plane that the
US does not export other we export the
F35 other car this is a strategic asset
that we will not hard to get to it's
very difficult so why South Pole y um
and does this take us into the realm of
light pollution yeah right I mean when I
look up at the at the starry night um
here in Los Angeles even though I'm T
sort of back towards the Eastern Hills
yeah um I'm I don't live at the coast um
I can see some pretty impressive Stars
not as uh impressive as when I highly
recommend people get up to the yosd High
Country in the in the month of August
you can catch some great meteor showers
it's an amazing place to begin with um
you had the meteor showers and you're
you're transported to another place yeah
um and there's a lot of light pollution
from cities yeah and it travels very
very far so I'm guessing you're down the
South Pole because there's a less light
pollution you're right a slight uh
deviation from that is uh it's not light
that we're looking for we're not looking
for optical light we're looking for heat
so it's heat pollution you're exactly
right we're looking to avoid heat
pollution so we want to be somewhere
cold we want to be somewhere that's far
away from you know man-made sources of
RF interference and microwave
interference and Communications
obviously um but the South Pole has a
couple of other properties one the sun
is below the Horizon and the Sun is 5,7
500 Kelvin and we're looking for
something that's a fraction of a Kelvin
maybe a few Milli or nanokelvin at most
so it's billions of times that we want
to get avoid even the Earth itself is
still 300 almost 300 Kelvin down there
you know freezing is is
273 um so it it does have that property
but the best part about it it's above a
lot of the Earth's atmosphere because at
9,000 feet above sea level
and it's so cold you don't know this
because you're a California baby but um
but on the East Coast when I would grow
up uh some days the bane of my existence
would be you'd listen on the radio and
they'd announce school closures uh due
to snowfall in the winter and sometimes
they'd say up you're out of luck because
it's too cold to snow sometimes the the
the air temperature cannot saturate and
form precipitation and the South Pole is
like that it's so cold that if you took
this glass I'm holding a glass here and
it was empty at on the table here and I
extend this glass up to outer space the
amount of water if I took all the water
in the atmosphere the humidity in the
atmosphere above the South Pole and
condensed it into a liquid it would be
A3 of a millimeter here in Los Angeles
it's about an inch or you know 25
millimeters or more and so you'd like to
not go there now why is that important
well water absorbs microwaves and that's
how your microwave oven works it heats
up the water molecules they start to
vibrate and jumble that causes friction
they heat up and eventually they'll boil
right so that's why sometimes you can
you know overheat uh you know liquid in
a microwave you can't tell but it's
super hot and actually can be dangerous
but in this case we don't want a photon
coming from The Big Bang perhaps or
before the Big Bang with the spark that
ignited it we don't want that to travel
for 14 billion years nearly and then get
absorbed in a water molecule above the
Earth's surface so the best place to go
is space but space even with you know
space I haven't done any scientific
experiments but it's about a maybe a
factor of a thousand to a million times
more expensive so the same satellite
that we were worried was going to scoop
us was exactly a 100 or almost 200 times
more expensive than our experiment at
the South Pole yeah I was going to ask
you about this a million dollars given
to a postc that was the first trunch of
funding we ended up getting about 10
million 10 million I mean even $10
million is a lot of money by any
standard yeah but probably to my mind
doesn't seem like enough money to to
build a high- powerered telescope at the
South Pole bring people there have the
infrastructure I mean it's not like
you're rolling this thing out onto the
ice and and and just pointing at the sky
I mean you
need I mean I guess you could use the
bucket from the plane as a bathroom but
you need a number of things so um yeah
you probably need hundreds of millions
of dollars to build a a facility down at
the south pole but those are all funded
by by you and your and your listeners
and and and so for the taxpayers so the
National Science Foundation it operates
those c130s are part of the National
Science foundation's Fleet we don't pay
a dime for them if I want to build a a
computer network system down there we
don't pay a dime for it it's actually a
point of contention because now I'm no
longer with that experiment I've I've
you know recused myself from it uh for
many years not because of the incident
where we you know were basically
disconfirming later disconfirmed our
result right so you let the result out
you do this news conference I want I do
the news conference okay so big press
conference big press conference it turns
and you know fast forward some years it
turns out this was not correct some
months yeah only a few months well
better to be corrected quickly than you
know collect your Noel prize and have to
like give it back or something right I I
have to say and and um the pursuit of
prizes is a complicated thing I was
always discouraged from pursuing prizes
all my advisers well my my graduate
adviser was very pure in the sense that
she just liked doing experiments I
remember she was very very smart very
smart is Barbara Barbara Chapman I mean
when and and you know it's not just her
pedigree that that um is evidence of
that but since pedigree is something
most people can um at least understand
internally and externally I mean she was
you know went to Harvard as an
undergraduate then she was at UCSF and
Caltech and she she um actually had a
project sending zebra fish up into space
looking at uh yeah uh looking at
development of the vestibular system in
the absence of gravity gravity wow and
then um fixing these specimens and
bringing them back um also did a lot of
great work back on Earth but she wasn't
somebody who was ambitious for ambition
sake and um and my post adviser was
exceedingly ambitious but he he also
discouraged
prizes and the pursuit of prizes that's
the right way to be yeah I think that
it's it's it's sort of like going into
football to get a Super Bowl ring these
things do represent the Pinnacle but um
it's dangerous to be chasing that like
singular carrot because you can miss the
you missed the journey look I'm not
proud of that I'm not proud that I had
such a base venol you know kind of
pursuit uh I think it was as I said
compounded by psychological factors you
know but did you have fun doing the work
oh I loved it yeah I mean getting to do
what I do now and now it's even even
more exciting in a sense because the
project you know and by the way it's not
like we made a blunder and like you know
Rob helpfully took the lens cap off the
camera we didn't make a blunder like
that there have been many many blunders
and actually led to much worse
retractions our results are stronger
than ever I should say are the bicep
team's results i' I've left the team as
I said but their results are still the
very best by almost in order of
magnitude we hope with the Simons
Observatory that I'm uh you know
co-leading with with colleagues at
Prince and pen and and other places that
we can actually supersede them but we
haven't yet uh and so what we saw I
should be very clear we didn't make a
blunder we didn't see like put our Thumb
in front of the viewfinder you we didn't
make something stupid we mistook a
signal produced by another astrophysical
source as representative of this curling
pattern of microwaves for which bicep
was named um that would be indicative if
confirmed of the inflationary origin of
the universe
which by the way would be concomitant
with the existence of the Multiverse so
the stakes are really high that means
the incentives to make sure you detect
that are really high too and not get
scooped as happened many many times my
adviser was scooped he never won the
Nobel my advisor's adviser he never won
the Nobel Prize these accidentally
discovered serendipitously discovered
astronomers penzes and Wilson they did
win the Nobel Prize um so there is a
pressure on scientists to get there
first like Falcon Scott Robert Scott
getting to the South Pole first there is
a benefit to Priority it's just a fact
of Life and Science is no different you
we teach undergraduates um about seven
or eight different experiments all of
them won the Nobel Prize at some point
in physics history doesn't mean they're
a going to win a Nobel Prize no why
because they didn't get their first so
getting their first and sign that For
Better or For Worse is the sign of of
greatest accomplishments the sinqua Nan
of accomplishment is that that does lead
to no prizes now but the goal is always
I I have a motto which is you know go as
fast as you carefully can yeah um but
sounds like you were wrong for the right
reasons meaning no one made up data you
were there was a confound that you
weren't aware of you became aware of it
yeah I should say what we saw we what we
mistook as the imperator of this origin
spark of the universe was the humblest
substance in the universe namely dust so
when a star explodes it produces after
its lifetime as expired it fuses lighter
elements into heavier elements
eventually it gets to produce iron and
iron is the the element for which once
it's fused together from I think it's
silicon or or two nuclei before it it um
it produces too little energy to keep
the star buoyant and expanded and so the
star immediately starts to collapse when
that collapse occurs it blasts out into
the interstellar medium that surrounds
it all the the byproducts the Silicon
nitrogen oxygen hydrogen and the iron
and it blasted out into the universe uh
surounding it and that happens enough
times in our galaxy that the Galaxy is
actually pretty polluted place uh it's
smoggy it's dusty it's dirty and the
dust is actually little microscopic
meteorites so on my website brian.com uh
I give away actually I have a special
link bring.com
huberman uh I will uh give away actual
meteorites that come from your ancestral
homeland of Argentina and you'll see
when you get them they're highly
magnetic they're very dense and I give
you the material uh the composition of
these meteorites in the assay we do
x-ray crystallography on them it's
really cool the um the actual
composition of them uh was uh is
determined by this last event that a
star does before it dies which is to
produce iron so we did discover a
microwave signal from the Galaxy not
from the Big Bang not from the cosmos
but from particular and unique to our
galaxy which is that when a star
explodes it produces this material
mostly made of iron these the microm
meteorites that I talked about put on my
website for your listeners and this um
these micrometeorites are also going to
act like little Compass needles they're
highly magnetically susceptible so the
Milky Way everything in the universe has
a magnetic field you have a magnetic
field birds have it um you know even
magnet bacteria can have it and our
planet obviously has it and the galaxy
has it what happens when you put a
compass in a magnetic field those
needles get aligned with the magnetic
field that then produces a type of
polarization now polarization is the
least familiar light has three
characteristics its intensity its color
or spectrum and its
polarization almost nobody knows what
polarization is but it's really the
essence of what makes light a wave if
you think about an ocean wave the ocean
wave is going up and down undulating up
and down and the undulation the
direction perpendicular to the Sea
surface is it sort of its polarization
happens to be the water waves are
actually polarized longitudinally but
forget that or if you and I separated by
a meter and a half 2 met we have rope
between us if we oscillate that rope up
and down at a certain frequency the
frequency will be the Spectrum the color
of the light the how hard we do that
would be the intensity of the light and
the plane that we're oscillating the
jump rope or whatever that's the plane
of
polarization these little needles of
cosmic dust from the exploded um inter
inerts of a star that died to you know
in our galaxy many years ago and many
many billions of these Stars uh they
produce these these particles of dust so
we saw that pattern instead of seeing
being the birth pangs of the Big Bang
the origin of the
universe I'd like to take a quick break
and thank one of our sponsors Roa Roa
makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are
of the absolute highest quality I've
been wearing Roa readers and sunglasses
for years now and I love them they're
lightweight they have superb Optics and
they have lots of frames to choose from
I'm excited to share that Roa and I have
teamed up to create a new style of red
lens glasses these red lens glasses are
meant to be worn in the evening after
the sun goes down they filter out short
wavelength light that comes from screens
and from LED lights the sorts of LED
lights that are most commonly used as
overhead and frankly lamp lighting
nowadays I want to emphasize Roa red
lenss glasses are not traditional blue
blockers they're not designed to be worn
during the day and to filter out blue
light from screen light they're designed
to prevent the full range of wavelengths
that suppress melatonin secretion at
night and that can alter your sleep so
by wearing Roa red lens glasses they
help you calm down and they improve your
transition to sleep most nights I stay
up until about 10: p.m. or even midnight
and I wake up between 5: and 7:00 a.m.
depending on when I went to sleep now I
put my Roa red lens glasses on as soon
as it gets dark outside and I've noticed
a much easier transition to sleep which
makes sense based on everything we know
about how filtering out shortwave
lengths of light can allow your brain to
function correctly Roa red lens glasses
also look cool frankly you can wear them
out to dinner or to concerts or out with
friends so it turns out it is indeed
possible to support your biology to be
scientific about it and to remain social
after all if you'd like to try Roa go to
roka.com that's
r.com and enter the code huberman to
save 20% off your first order again
that's r.com and enter the code huberman
at checkout so I want to talk about what
you're working on now before I do that
yeah right mini segue there are a number
of questions that I have that some of
which I sort of know the answers to most
of which I don't know the answers to but
I think a lot of people either wonder
about or if they
don't they can quickly enrich their
experience of daily life if we were to
get answers on the following so I'm
thinking about this not rapid fire Q&A
but maybe like one to three minute
answers about the following for
instance why does the Moon look so much
bigger when it's near the Horizon as
opposed to uh overhead yeah my son asked
me that two days ago so that's a fun one
so uh let's go first with that sometimes
the Moon is huge sometimes the Moon is
small um and I'm not talking about when
it's full versus a sliver right um tell
us why so the Moon is always a half a
degree wide same exact apparent angular
diameter as the sun which is unique
among the 290 moons in our solar system
only our moon has the same apparent
diameter as seen from its Planet as the
sun does meaning we're the only planet
that can have a total solar eclipse an
exact total solar eclipse like we had a
couple a months ago in Austin Texas and
elsewhere um be that as it may the moon
doesn't change in size um I would hope
not that that would freak me out yeah uh
the Moon is uh is about 60 times the
Earth's radius from the earth it's
250,000 miles away which is about one
and a half light seconds away uh and it
is about the size of the continental US
in in uh diameter so uh or a little bit
less so the uh the moon's size doesn't
change but when the human eye has
something to compare it to the the the
brain has a reference point to compare
it to and because it's so big if there's
something in front of it a
747 a um a a person uh a large building
even when you were if the moon is behind
that object because it's so far away
moving even the Earth's entire radius
doesn't change the moon's apparent
angular diameter it's the same in P King
as it is here Beijing as it is in Los
Angeles right so that means a very small
a very large change in the distance in
the Earth would change the building size
dramatically it could reduce it to zero
basically but when you compare it to
something that lands close on the
horizon your brain has something
visually to compare it to when it's
overhead Zenith or whatever it doesn't
have anything to compare it to so you're
just looking at it but you can always
measure it and you can prove to yourself
it's always the same size it's about the
size of your pinky fingernail held at
arms length same size as the sun and
interestingly enough it's you said one
degree it's half a degree half a degree
degree oh that's why you said pinky so
folks um most people probably aren't
familiar with thinking in degrees if you
want to understand a degree put your uh
right or left doesn't matter um arm out
in front of you raise your thumb like a
thumbs up so at the the width of your
thumb at at arms length is approximately
one degree that's why you say for your
pinky it's about half a degree I should
also say and this is an opportunity to
give a a fun little lesson in visual
Acuity if I were to draw um 30 black
lines spaced from one another with the
just the the uh light color of your nail
in between them uh we'd say they were 60
lines you know black nail black you know
alternating um your Acuity for 2020
vision is approximately 60 cycles per
degree yes a hawk any kind of raptor is
about 120 cycles per degree which is why
they can sit up on a lamp post and
actually see the the rustling of the of
the grass below and probably make out
some of the individual Furs on the on
the head of a rodent but you can't so
you um so what do I mean by 60 cycles
per degree if if if I were to draw um 40
black lines so now you have 80 total of
black and then the color of the nail
black then the color of the so you would
see that as believe it or not as solid
black right it's it's uh you don't have
it's beyond your Acuity threshold when
you say one degree so this is important
so so when the moon is is quote unquote
giant at the Horizon put out your pinky
it covers the moon you can eclipse the
moon right you can eclipse the moon when
the moon is overhead you can eclipse the
moon with your pinky and most people
thinking no way that can't be true but
it's absolutely true fun fact uh which
is bigger the uh width of a rainbow or
the width of the Moon and is a rainbow
wider than a half a degree you ever seen
a rainbow you can visual I mean in the
sky it seems as I'm not talking about
the arc the band thick from red to blue
from Red ro ro Biv yeah what's bigger
gosh intuitively I want to say it's
thicker but now you're going to tell me
that it can't be because it's um this is
like the the pink Floyd album right this
is literally just the the the polar Side
of Moon the dark side of the moon the
rainbow coming through when you take
light and pass it through pris um I'm
gonna say it's one it's one degree uh so
the rainbow's bigger uh no the the
moon's bigger it seems like roughly the
same size but I when I think of a r i
just think of like the it's the same
size it's the size of the sun which
question thank you very much there you
go Professor FES the the test for once
yeah um
okay next question people obsess over
this I have my theories I think it's
still debated when you watch a
sunset you get that beautiful long
wavelength short wavelength contrast
that I blab about incessantly on the
podcast and social media because that's
what setting your circadian clock it's
that orange red tones and the blue tones
of the sky but right as the sun goes
down across the Horizon especially over
the ocean there is the phenomenon known
as the Green Flash yes what is the basis
for the Green Flash well I'll tell you
something really cool if you go to the
South Pole which is over subscribed by a
factor of 10 to one you believe 10 times
as many people want to spend their nine
Monon year of their nine months of their
year minimum at the South Pole than we
have room for to actually do work at the
South Paul's car which means 10 people
total no there's 45 people there just
kidding just kidding and they're all
listening to you half the time um so um
when you want to go there when you do go
there they actually don't know where the
Sun is going to set remember the Sun
only Rises and sets once a year right so
it's one day and one night per year six
months long um where the sun sets is
unknown and and actually the days
preceding it the sun is making a big
circle around your head I've seen this
with the moon so the Sun and the Moon
they just make a circle and slowly after
reaching their Apex on the first day of
summer which is December 21st for them
down there upside in eventually it
crosses the Horizon on March on March
21st around March 21st that's the first
day of fall or when they start getting
ready for winter they don't know where
it's going to go down we think of it
always going to the west but where is
West at the South Pole every direction
you look is North okay uh so when this
uh occurs the actual phenomenon that you
mentioned the Green Flash can last for
days or can last for hours so if you
really are an afficionado of huberman
protocols and you want to see the Green
Flash apply to be down there but the bad
news is you're stuck there for nine more
months okay um so yes it's a real
phenomenon not only can you take
pictures of it but you you can see it uh
with your eye uh the cor only correction
I would say is you pretty much need to
have a perfectly clear day you can't
have any clouds on the horizon um and
it's best seen over the ocean so we're
blessed here but for those of us that
don't end up at the South Pole yeah God
willing um send me pictures like I don't
like environment Z really kill it um but
uh but if I watch the sun set over the
Pacific or or um I see the Green Flash
sometimes uh what's the basis of that
yeah so the Earth's atmosphere is
actually
a um it's it's layered okay but it's
actually simpler to think about the
Earth as being flat now there's no
hopefully there's no flers out there
thinking that Brian keing is a is
advocating the Flat Earth but imagine
this table we're looking at a table
imagine there's a slab of you know
translucent glass on it and we're
sitting at the on the table underneath
the slab of glass pretty thick glass
right and you're looking straight up you
look through a minimum amount of the
glass right straight up would be Zenith
at your local Horizon every direction
you're looking is your Horizon you see
off the edge of this Flat Earth in this
uh in this analogy um when you look at a
slight angle you're going through more
path length of the substr of the
substance more glass finally if you did
have this thing extending to Infinity
you'd be looking through an infinite
amount of atmosphere or glass when
you're tangent to the Horizon when
you're going parallel to the Earth's
surface and this Flat Earth analogy uh
the earth atmosphere is not only made of
oxygen it actually has a lot of
particulat and be it's because of those
particulates a lot of them come from
dust and and uh a lot of them come from
you know volcanoes and and and a large
amount now comes from human-made uh
sources pollution and so forth the more
Optical depth the more path length that
you look through the more scattering of
the Sun's light occurs when scattering
occurs the longer wavelength light is e
more easily penetrates through dust smog
particles even glass okay so that goes
through easier and the short wavelengths
comparable to the intermolecular spacing
of the smog the dust the gas in the
atmosphere the oxygen scatters much more
efficiently and so that gets scattered
out of the beam of light from the sun
the Sun's light though actually Peaks
slightly in the green we don't actually
notice this because our eyes are and
we're used to thinking of it as very
yellow um it happen and this the reason
for this can be you know substantiated
by U night vision glasses what color is
the light coming in it's green right
they amplify versions of these things
why because your eye is very sensitive
to Green Light it's even more sensitive
to Green Light than yellow light so and
that's because the sun which is what
we've evolved to adapt to being most
sensitive to sunlight is more greenish
than yellow so there's more power at the
wavelength like somewhere between like
450 and 550 nanometers exactly 100%
right um so at that green flash at that
moment of Green Flash you're seeing two
things one is the sensitivity of the
human eyes slightly ma maximized to that
but that doesn't explain why photographs
see it as well and the other reason is
that most of the yellow light and the
sunlight is getting scattered away and
so you're mainly seeing that green light
but you're only seeing it at the point
of Maximum scattering which occurs
exactly when the sun crosses the Horizon
because of the interaction with all that
atmospheric dust y that's wild because
for the longest time I had a biological
explanation for this that I think was
based on a paper that was published
maybe in nature but don't quote me on
that um just because published in nature
doesn't mean it's
wrong there's I've Got Friends with a
few nature editors still um and a great
Journal look amazing we talk we do a
whole episode about nature nature
science and cell but the um the
explanation that was getting kicked
around for a while was a biological
explanation which is that our ability to
perceive Reds and greens and blues and
yellows is based on our trichromacy the
presence of these three different photo
receptors short medium and long
wavelength or you know green red so to
speak that absorb short medium or long
wavelength light and then the comparison
there's this
opponency um whereby our ability to see
red is really contention on our ability
to perceive green and so what like for a
for someone who's red green color blind
one in 80 males for instance they still
see stuff out in the world that's red
but they see as more orangish or brown
ah okay dogs the same way right they're
not colorblind true monochromats that
don't see are very rare that is a one
form AC I think it's called AC chromates
yeah um don't quote me on that either
but in any case the the idea was that if
you're looking at something that's very
enriched in Long wavelengths like orange
red and you stare at it for long enough
have you ever done that like American
flag uh visual optical illusion when you
stare at it then you look away from it
and you see the opposite colors right
and so one biological explanation is
that the the Sun is setting and you're
looking at this orange red thing when
the sun is low in the sky you can
actually look at it without um
distressing your eyes right because
right um as opposed to overhead when you
should never stare at the Sun and then
the moment that that reddish orange
disappears The the biological
explanation is that there's a a kind of
perception of a green flash yeah because
of the opponent seeing the switch to the
other let's just say wavelength channel
so to speak I don't think that's in
disagreement I think that might explain
the amplification that we see but then
it doesn't explain why you'd see it in a
photographic emulsion right there's
nothing biological about it I like your
explanation better because it's
explained by uh by real physics and and
the biology of color opponency is also
physics but um but not as well worked
out yeah okay
cool earlier we were talking about the
perceived relationship between the
menstrual cycle which is not always 28
days but is on average 28 days and the
lunar cycle is there any evidence that
um well it'd be amazing if one influence
the other in the in the other direction
that the menstrual cycles were
influencing the lunar cycle but is there
any evidence uh between for a true
relationship
between the lunar cycle and the
menstrual cycle that's been documented I
don't know uh it's interesting The Sun
Also produces tides and produces
gravitational effect um but the dominant
effect on Earth due to that 28 day 29
day cycle of the moon is its effect on
the Earth's oceans which produces four
Tides a day too high and too low and
actually Galileo incorrectly used that
phenomenon as a way to butress his
argument that the Earth went around the
sun he basically if you're listening I'm
taking my glass of MAA yante yeah so he
said that when the earth is spinning it
rotates once per day but it's also
revolving around the Sun so these
combined motions make this sloshing of
the liquid you see that and he claimed
that is what caused the tides on the
earth and the fact that's completely
wrong it's amazing Andrew and you think
about how brilliant a scientists can be
and it's almost like the proportion of
their blunder is proportionate to how
brilliant they are you know because it
it also correlates with the the the um
height of the problems they're chasing
exactly um you were you were saying that
Galileo got certain things wrong but got
a number of things right that's right
Einstein too Newton too being wrong for
the right reasons is actually very
important in science for and by the
right reasons I mean that nobody's you
know pcking P value hacking or fudging
data that they're not tossing data
they're really trying to solve problems
and you it's almost like in sports a
great competitor wants great competitors
yeah I mean what's the like why would
somebody want to like cheat into a
different weight class knock somebody
out and consider themselves the world
champion at that weight class like it's
just it's silly it's it's and in science
to not try and seek the truth is
anti-science U certainly it happens but
okay so no no clear evidence that the
lunar cycle influences the the men I
would expect that it would influence
other animals I don't know what the
menstral Cycles are you know deer or
whatever you know who knows or or any
animal that has you know an egg that you
know well a lot of animals have not a
menstrual cycle but an EST cycle so like
a a lot of rodents have like a 4-day
cycle okay um so it clearly doesn't map
to the the lunar cycle but um you hear a
lot about about these things and humans
are amazing at drawing correlations it's
a again we're a prediction making
machine we're a storytelling machine and
you know and in the past by the way the
moon was a lot closer than it not a lot
but it was closer the moon moves about
the width of your again back to your
fingers now so the moon moves Away by
the the width of about your thumb's
fingernail every year moves further away
centimeter away from the earth because
there's a gravitational competition
between the gravitational force of the
moon and the Earth's oceans provide a
source of friction so over the years
it's getting farther and farther away
such that it won't eventually won't be
able to have total solar eclipses it'll
be it's called an annular Eclipse where
it doesn't obscure it completely anyway
so in the past this is the only way to
say millions of years ago when the first
hominids were evolved
you know the moon was much much closer
you know millions of times of their you
know fingernails eventually it starts to
add up um and certainly when the first
life formed on the earth it was only you
know uh was probably 30 times closer
than it is now so yeah so I short answer
I don't know where are some of the best
places in the Northern Hemisphere and
please don't say uh the North Pole um
where people can go see
spectacular um
nighttime stuff yeah um so I think of
yosity High Country in August for the
meteor shower yeah certainly not at the
level that you're accustomed to looking
at things but with the naked eye you're
going to be assuming that that it's not
cloudy you're going to be treated to um
a light show that is in my experience
beyond anything I've ever exper just spe
just extraordinary on my the special
website that I made Brian king.com
hubman I list the four major meteor
showers in one in each season that
people can watch with your naked eye in
fact it's had to use a telescope you
don't want a telescope because it juts
through the field of view yeah exactly
you want the whole field of view and
humans have an amazing as you know huge
field 190 degrees or something like that
you know just so not as big as an owl
but but quite big and you want to take
that in because you're you're looking
for motion you're looking for intensity
sometimes you can see colors and I list
what elements contribute to the colors
of different meteorites on this you know
website that I had um but yes the uh the
anywhere that's uh more than say 20 30
40 miles away from a big major city
is fine even in San Diego uh there's two
dark sky communities one is called
Julian California and the other one's
the anab bgo desert and it's called bgo
Springs these are areas where they uh
forbid upward Shining Light so the only
light can be downward facing it also has
to have very narrow spectral bands on it
so like sodium vapor you know very high
so that you can filter it out basically
with certain very inexpensive Optical
filters but you know like I said almost
anywhere but the good thing to know is
that if you get a telescope again you
can see 90% of what's going to be
fascinating to you as as a lay person
with a telescope that cost $50 you can
see all the craters you can see
mountains on the moon and again these
mountains were not just like cool things
they destroyed a they falsified the
scientific Paradigm quote unquote which
was that the moon was perfectly
crystalline and and spherical Galileo
showed no not only does it have
mountains I can measure the height of
those mountains I can measure the plains
of L lava flows and and eventually they
they came out theories that it doesn't
have tectonic motion it doesn't have an
iron core I mean it's amazing you can
see all these things with your uh with
the small telescope like the one I have
for you um but uh you don't need like
the Hubble telescope or Mount will you
don't need any of that you can see the
rings of Saturn the moons of Jupiter you
can even on a dark sky without a
telescope see an object that's outside
of our galaxy it's called the Andromeda
galaxy that's very important in the
history of astronomy in 19 19 29 1923
rather uh on Mount Wilson not far from
here Edwin Hubble realized that that was
not part of the Milky Way galaxy it was
way too far away to be located within
the Milky Way it was about 20 times the
radius of the Milky Way and that
revolutionized all of our our you know
con conceptions of where the universe is
located is it centered on us are we the
most important thing no he showed that
you can see that on most fall nights in
the constellation Andromeda with your
naked eye it's six times wider than the
full moon it's incredible when I look at
many of the
constellations I don't see how our
ancient predecessors um got to the
description of a a bear or whatever is
that because they saw more stars than I
did or is that because they had a Wilder
imagination or we're taking psychedelics
or something 20 centuries before Tik Tok
um so I cut them some slack there are a
couple that look similar to what they're
you know or it depends on how you
connect the dots the big The Big Dipper
and the Little Dipper kind of like a
okay you you get that those aren't
constellations those aren't con I have
to be I have to put on my my very very
prec why are they not constellation uh
so they're uh they're portions of a
constellation so they're they're called
asterisms so an asterism is a collection
of stars that's associated with each
other but it's not uh the the full
composition of a constellation so the
constellation is actually called Ursa
Major the big Dippers in the tail and
the hind quarters of Ursa Major which is
the Great Bear the Little Dipper is the
AST ISM Seven Stars that make up there's
80 something stars that make up the
little bear which actually doesn't look
like a bear Ursa Major kind of does look
like the California republic flag that
we have um but uh but yes the the
asterism I always ask for people to
leave you can't you know they're not
making new constellations there's only
88 constellations over the whole uh four
Pi spherical uh uh Dome of the sky but
you can leave your own asterism on the
podcast you can leave five stars on your
podcast and mine so you can't have a
constellation but you can have an Asis
love it uh did you catch uh Haley's
Comet when it came by when you were a
few years older than I was I was uh I
was uh 14 it was right after I got my
first telescope comes through every SE
every 70 some years make it to the next
76 years yeah that's right I'm right
that was a that's very good yeah I
remember 70 something all right but like
the best constellation it's like the
best comet in history in fact there's
better ones yeah I remember going out to
see it it was a part of a group that
went camping and it looked like a smear
of light it's hard to know did I really
see it or did I not in any case um your
daddy prob the only other comment that I
that came to mind um oh is the San Diego
thing was the hail Bop haop where there
was a group that committed mass suicide
yeah these were people that had castray
themselves had been eating a subc
caloric M sub maintenance caloric diet
to live forever and then decide to wear
Converse and kill themselves what do you
think let's not go dark there um what
what do you think is the relationship
between like comets and these these wild
human behaviors it's so interesting you
mention that and lunacy for that matter
like full moon and lunacy lunacy right
crime statistics so look at these words
disaster catastrophe they asked in both
of those means star they used to believe
that stars comets eclipses those things
were influencing events on Earth caused
by these Celestial forces for not
propitiating them making them Gods happy
or whatever and in fact Columbus owes
his life you know he was almost killed
in Jamaica and I think it was 15 uh 1498
a couple years after discovering he's
still exploring and um he was failed to
ingratiate himself with the local you
know native inhabitants of Jamaica
wherever he was um and uh they were
going to kill him and he luckily had on
for navigation astronomy and navigation
have always been intimately related
because um first of all if you know
where Polaris is which is not the
brightest star it's in the Little Dipper
it's the pole star it's the North Star
you've heard of True North Northstar
it's actually very close to being if you
go to the North Pole and look straight
up it's very close to being directly
above you and does it always Mark true
north and and any human time scale it
does over over thousands and tens of
thousands of years it it changes but
right now for the next couple thousand
years so you know don't don't worry you
still be accurate that is within a half
a degree or that your brain thinks at
these time scales as long as you're
talking for the next thousand years
you're good well I say like this you
know the universe could end in a heat
death and a big rip or whatever but you
know that's not for a trillion years so
everybody keep paying your taxes uh so
you could use it for navigation so you
could know your latitude but measuring
longitude was very difficult because you
couldn't actually you to know longitude
you need to measure time relative to
where grenwich meantime is that's how
Greenwich became uh so important and
that's why London had its huge economy
again these things are always related
capitalism and and even how we measure
latitude and longitude comes from the
fact that London and temps River 90% of
the world's Commerce flowed through
there at one point point or another it's
incredible so anyway latitude longitude
is very important people started to know
that um yeah these these events would
occur and including this event with with
Columbus and his and he brought along
with him on his voyage an astronomer um
and this astronomer knew that in uh two
days time from when these uh uh natives
had captured some of Columbus's crew
that there was going to be a total solar
eclipse and it was going to go through
Jamaica and he said he told Columbus and
Columbus said to the inhabit if you
don't give our people back our our God
is going to obscure and kill your God
the Sun God they're like f you you know
whatever and then it happened and they
totally believ that they were in control
of these celestial events we better give
the people back and Columbus got the
hell out of there so it's an amazing
story but yes comets have always been a
a so Columbus actually um used the Sun
as manipulative barter to to threat to
as a threat military yeah he used it for
military uh coercion an important book
for anyone to read who's interested in
basically why we're still here um in my
opinion is the book longitude yes I'm
interview Dava Soo I'm interviewing her
tomorrow this is an incredible book um
doesn't require any science or technical
background to read and appreciate about
the development of the first reliable
timekeeping devices for
navigating at Sea uh even on um overcast
nights and uh longitud and finding
longitude it's a spectacular read it is
and um change the way that I think about
human evolution and and Technology
development generally direct connection
I sorry to interrupt but there's a
connection between that and the Nobel
Prize so there was something called the
longitude prize in the 1700s to develop
a clock that could be used in the naval
and Naval situations on boats you
couldn't use a grandfather clock as the
the pendulum acceleration so they had to
find something and this guy Thompson or
somebody Haron Harrison yes so he
invented this this mechanical clock with
predecessor of our modern WI up clocks
obviously we used uh cesium and atomic
clocks but that prize for 10,000 you
know pounds or whatever it was was an
early predecessor of the Nobel Prize
I've been waiting this whole
conversation to talk to you about
Adaptive Optics let me give just a
little bit of backdrop for how I'm
approaching this um in the field of
Neuroscience there there's as with any
field of biology a desire to see smaller
and smaller things at higher and higher
resolution and there have been all sorts
of incredible discoveries in microscopy
like two Photon microscopy one Photon
microscopy electron microscopy you see
things down to the you know tiny tiny
nanometer
size some years ago uh a group out of
University of Rochester developed um
Adaptive Optics I think it was David
Williams's Group which is borrowed from
astronomy and my very top Contour
understanding of this is that you're
using the presence of noise in the
environment essentially as part of the
microscope to get a better image and
this was used in the field of
Opthalmology to look into the back of
the eye this incredible three cell layer
thick pie crust that lines the back of
our eyes that it gives us all of our
visual perception not alone but allows
for all of our visual perception as I
mentioned before that the eye has a lens
there's Vitus there's all sorts of
opportunity for light scatter and then
within the the eye itself you've got
these multiple layers you have to go
through before you can see the photo
receptors but using Adaptive Optics you
can take all that noise all that stuff
between the microscope and what you want
to see Way Way Back in the eye and use
that in air quotes here noise and make
it part of the microscope so to speak
and without going into further detail
there I was always told that Adaptive
Optics was borrowed from your field
astronomy where people used the the
presence of atmospheric dust of these
stuff in the way and made it part of the
lens if you will to be able to see
things at higher resolution which I just
think is so incredible it's like saying
the the the barrier becomes the portal
um through which you can see even more
than had you had a clear obacle is the
way let's sh out all right shout out
Ryan holid never yeah never met him but
I like that book very much okay so what
what is Adaptive Optics yeah um at the
level for astronomers okay so we live in
an atmosphere a planet with an
atmosphere thank God we wouldn't be here
having this conversation right um and
that atmosphere is a dirty window it's
like literally looking through uh the
windshield of your car and it's cloudy
and Dusty and and contaminated we live
in uh in in its presence and the best
astronomical telescopes are the ones
that are launched above the atmosphere
out of the atmosphere Hubble Space
Telescope Kepler and now the James web
telescope again those are multi-billion
dollar telescopes the James web to build
it and by the way any one lesson to
leave you with and maybe your audience
with as well is whenever you hear a
scientific instruments cost always in
your mind at least double it Andrew Lang
my late great mentor used to say
multiply by pi uh because a you're not
taking into account the fact that you
don't build say a destroyer or an
aircraft carrier to build it you build
it to use it and it's about 10% of the
operating of the uh construction cost to
operate an instrument a battleship a
telescope whatever it's a rule of thumb
that project managers love to use so
that means in 10 years it's going to
double the price and we hope that Hubble
and and web and Hubble's already lasted
for years on it um so it'll last a long
time so whenever you hear this but it's
incredibly expensive one kilogram used
to cost like $10,000 to bring to orbit
and Elon keeps talking about how cheap
it's going to be 5 but he has yet to
launch a scientific instrument I talked
to him for 10 minutes on my podcast once
and I tried to get him to uh shut off
these starlinks are amazing I have one
in my house uh but they have the
property that they go through
astronomical images and they leave a
satellite trail behind them which is you
know can be com you're taking a picture
of a deep star a deep you know Galaxy or
whatever and you see these streaks going
through it it ruins the image and you
have to wait until they're gone but at
least an optical astronomy you can
physically literally paint those
satellites black and they will no longer
reflect and so they won't obscure the
image whatsoever so you're saying that
the Starling satellites are going to
make your job more difficult they
definitely uh are because you can while
you can paint an optical satellite black
and make it black we're looking for heat
there's no way to stealth you know
confuse or or BL out heat sorry that's a
law of thermodynamics anything that's
above absolute zero will always give off
heat and worst of all the signals that
he uses are in the exact microwave
spectral range that we use to look at
the CMB the cosmic microwave background
so what's his response to this I told
him that having internet everywhere is
more important no he said he would look
into it you know nine months ago Elon I
know you like the show uh so please do
reach out to me but this would be just
turning it off when it's over our
telescope basically that's what and the
South Pole so it's not a big
specific request there's no one at the
it's not like he's getting millions of
dollars in ad revenue from people at the
South Pole they don't use them so anyway
that's I'm I'm asking Elon it's it's a
small ask but anyway um so we want to be
above the atmosphere but it's Millions
maybe billions of dollars to do that for
a telescope like we're using or for an
optical telescope here on Earth so
scientists became very uh convinced that
there has to be a way to mitigate the
effects of the atmosphere now what is
the main effect of the atmosphere well
you learned it when you were a kid
twinkle twink twinkle little star how I
wonder what you are what is that
twinkling it's called scintillation
scintillation is a property of a point
source which is a star so far away even
though they're enormous they still only
subtend a Zero Dimensional almost Zero
Dimensional dot of light on the sky when
it goes through the atmosphere the
atmosphere has macroscopic turbulence
features the atmosphere is a fluid
there's turbulence there's roing columns
or cells of the atmosphere and if you've
ever looked at a star they Jitter they
they they looks like they're moving
around and that's the combination of the
atmospheric cells each column of air
that has slightly more density will
refract light slightly different angles
remember we talked about light when it
goes through an a lens it refracts it
bends so should we be thinking about the
light from Stars kind of like a jagged
line coming towards our eye it's coming
through it's getting deflected slightly
and it's moving in and it's landing on
different retinal cells and we're
perceiving that as is motion or in a CCD
array it's also landing on different
pixels so you can't get away from it you
know by using uh technology it's still
an effect it's caused by these
atmospheric turbulent cells and by the
way you can tell and you can identify a
planet by the fact it does not
scintillate it does not twinkle twinkle
so Jupiter's visible tonight I hope
you'll see it with the telescope we can
see it after we're done recording uh we
keep going we're about halfway done I
figure uh we'll go outside we'll look at
it and you'll see it's not it's
stationary and I actually used that on
the N of kiss my way for the first time
but I'm not going to talk about that uh
when you look at the planet you can
identify them by their lack of C vation
it's it's a way to identify if it's a a
plane a star or a planet so astronomers
including a colleague of mine and UC
system CLA Max and other people realized
in the 1960s and 70s that if they had um
a a a fake star it's actually called
either a guide star or an artificial
star I'll explain what how they make
that in a minute then if they knew the
exact properties of that guide star then
they could measure just the guide star
through the same Optics of the telescope
and then they would broad they would
take the the light from that artificial
star onto a flexible deformable mirror
so the mirror could actually wobble and
wiggle and it would do so an exactly
compensatory way to nullify the
atmospheric turbulence so it's basically
what light does when it goes through um
a cell of the atmosphere it traverses a
slightly longer path difference so they
would shorten the path difference of the
mirror they make it a little bit closer
in the direction of that cell and other
places they make it farther away and
vice versa they compensate for it
and this was done by a combination of
two technologies one was uh the
deformable mirror that could Flex 100
times per second and the other was U
making these artificial Stars so how do
they make an artificial star they shoot
a laser into the troposphere that laser
illuminates sod the troposphere
troposphere is a layer of the atmosphere
uh I used to know all the different
layers but okay okay osphere is the
farthest away so some layer of the
atmosphere it's 40 30 40 km above the
Earth it's not quite in space farther
enough away way that the laser beam is
still columnated makes a nice beam and
it can illuminate and then cause this
sodium ions to uh flues basically so
they start to get really stimulated it
looks just like a star they know exactly
how they produced it they know exactly
what what phase and wavelength to
correct in the mirror and then they say
it's almost as good as going into space
it corrects exactly the compensation of
the Earth's atmosphere with the
combination of this deformable mirror
and it was actually used by my colleague
Andrea gz here at UCLA uh to measure the
properties of stars orbiting around the
black hole at the center of the Milky
Way and test Einstein's theory of
relativity without this on the twin 10
meter diameter kek telescopes in Hawaii
she never would have won that Nobel
Prize so it's amazing technology but it
was classified it was so uh useful to uh
to astronomers uh but it wasn't as
useful as to the military remember I
said Galileo used his telescope to sell
it to the military Venice uh it was
immediately classified by the US
military uh because if you think about a
spy satellite what's it doing well it's
staring down to earth and it's looking
at license you know looking at whatever
on Earth it's also going through the
atmosphere it's going to have the same
problems so they wanted to use that and
have this technological advantage over
the Soviets probably in the 1970s and
80s so they classified it they didn't
let many uh astronomers could build
things they could deliver the finished
product but they couldn't patent it they
couldn't use it and so Claire Max as I
said she could have been you know super
rich but it's interesting because now
they're using it um so it's bad enough
to look you know know from Earth to
space but as I said if you imagine the
Earth as having a slab of an atmosphere
imagine a sniper the sniper trying to
make a Kill Shot You Know Jack goes out
there trying to hit something five
kilometers three kilometers away or
whatever there's a lot of atmosphere in
the way and if you're looking through a
optical site that will also happen so
now they're they're actually using this
Optical um compensation and sniper
Scopes are using this technology
Adaptive Optics so it's another way that
astronomy has you know influenced
military uh you know developments as
well
very interesting I don't want to go uh
too far down this rabbit hole but I'm
aware that there are some technologies
now to use lasers to extract sound waves
in a similar way so there are
technologies that exist where you can
shine a laser at say a window on a
building from very far away and actually
hear the conversation inside the room by
way of the sound waves hitting that
window the conversion of sound waves to
Optical and then from Optical back to
sound on your computer allows that also
there was a technology that was um
publicized a few years back developed in
at least in part at Stanford the ability
to see around corners um by shining
lasers at the most visible location
closest to what you want to see and then
capturing Reflections and sound waves at
that location and essentially being able
to reconstruct images around corners see
how many objects are there so pretty
wild stuff you can you can imagine the
military and spy implications but also
just but but perhaps just as interesting
um the ability to for instance map the
uh positions and movements of Critters
in the deep ocean without actually
having to quote unquote see them you
could you could hear hear them I had a
really interesting experience a few
Summers back of going to somebody's pool
it was an impressive pool but the most
impressive thing about it was that you
could hear music perfectly well
underwater using adaptive uh adaptive
Acoustics and listening to your episode
go no it's wild you could dive you
listen to something above water dive
below water and still hear it as if it
playing in headphones maybe not quite as
well as in headphones but and if you
sosed around in the water there' be a
little perturbation but it's pretty
spectacular wasn't my pool unfortunately
I have one um big question that I think
everybody would like the answer to which
is to what extent do you think there's
life
outside Earth um or not on Earth and
when people hear this they think aliens
but you know like an insect likee
creature uh sing or small multicell
organism on another planet that that
itself would be a spectacular find yeah
I
mean Beyond
spectacular um is there any evidence
that that does exist is there any reason
to think that it couldn't exist um and
if it does would it have to be in a
different in a different galaxy
altogether what's the what what's the
going uh belief among those who are like
real scientists who don't believe that
there's whatever just real scientists
like what's what's the Thought like a
centipede on Mars like I I don't think
too many people would um be totally
surprised um they but that'd be pretty
wild well yeah I'm kind of an outlier so
just everyone should you know look to
the actual experts in this field but I
have some rigorous you know kind of
logical arguments that I believe the
probability of Li I would never say it's
zero but I think it's very low and I I
think I can substantiate that and the
best part is I can't be falsified right
now there's zero evidence
that there's life anywhere else in the
universe period full stop and a sentence
there's no evidence conclusive evidence
in lots of drones over New Jersey right
now not no evidence of Life knew get
into drones um uh so the the argument
that it would somehow first of all
transform our understanding of human
place is inarguable to me I I believe
that's true although in um this movie
contact is a really wonderful movie uh
it's not cheesy science fiction it was
the first to like use a wormhole and all
sorts of cool stuff as contrivances but
in that movie there's a scene where
President Bill Clinton is talking about
the discovery that this fictitious
character made but he's actually talking
about a meteorite that was discovered in
Antarctica and they just clipped that
and the meteorite was believed to have
microbial life and that meteorite's
origin was in inarguably from Mars okay
so the reasoning was this 1997 that
there was a meteorite found on in
Antarctica where it's easy to find
meteorites is in the movie in real life
there in real life in 1997 a scientist
announced a discovery of a meteorite
from Antarctica it's called Allen Land
Hills meteorite and it had what they
claimed were evidence of microbial life
and even respiration byproducts of these
microbial life forms okay it was such a
big deal that within minutes you know
Bill Clinton had a press conference on
the White House lawn where he goes this
Rock speaks to us from across the
generations and if confirmed will
undoubtedly you know revolutionize our
understanding of the universe around it
okay now the movie clips that clip to
make it seem like Ellie the fictitious
character discovered a like you know set
extraterrestrial technology not a microb
but in the Public's in mind that actual
scientific discovery was never falsified
it was certainly never confirmed no
one's ever come back to say that was
correct and that we did find microbial
evidence of microbial Life on Mars now
how did that meteorite get there well uh
some asteroids hit the moon that's why
it has craters on it it hits the Earth
that's why we have meteor crater Arizona
winds Arizona uh yukatan chalub where
the dinosaurs Doom was was sealed by the
giant impactor 66 million years ago
those impacts occur on every planet
every moon in our solar system so some
asteroid hit the surface of Mars
probably millions of years ago ejected
material low gravity on Mars low
atmosphere uh and that material has been
orbiting around and eventually made its
way and hit the Earth okay so matter
from Mars landed on the earth does that
make sense that's how I gave you I have
a lunar meteorite that I giving to you
again as a as a as a token of my
appreciation for all you do that came
the same way something hit the moon
blasted off some lunar it's called breia
it's the crust of the Moon eventually
made its way landed in northwest Africa
and I bought a slice of it from a I got
a dealer you know I got a meteorite
dealer um and uh got that for you okay
um so what's the lesson material gets
exchanged from planet to planet now I
asked the following question if that
happened on the Mars to the Earth the
moon to the earth so too has material
from the earth been ejected since life
emerged 3.7 billion years ago there's
literally millions of tons of Earth
that's floating around in space some of
that will have landed on Mars so someday
we'll get there we'll find some piece of
it now could it some of it have a
tardigrade on it could some of it have a
protozoa on it obviously it could um and
maybe some interesting mic microbes yeah
it could maybe some ancient microbes
that are no longer that's right um
extent yeah it could it could have
what's an adaptogen I I have no idea an
adapt you talk about adaptogens
adaptogens are it's it's a broad term
used to describe um any compound that
allows you to modulate the stress
response so maybe increase your stress
threshold or recover from stress more
quickly it's it's sort of like saying
stimulant no you know it's a broad
category I mean I think you know some
people say like you know certain
nonhallucinogenic mushroom strains or
adaptogens I mean the ability to to
buffer the stress response um I mean
things like riola have been described as
adaptogens and these work through
neurotransmitter systems so broadly
speaking they allow you to um perceive
effort as less effortful this kind of
thing okay yeah so one theory of the
formation of life on Earth you you asked
me about that earlier the origin of life
on Earth is a huge mystery how did life
get here one proposition was made by
Fred Hoy and other people sounds dirty
but it's not it's called pans spermia
just means that genetic material has
been transferred from another um another
astronomical object landed here on Earth
so uh the converse reaction occurs as
well but the the the fact is we don't
observe it even on Mars so if I told you
you know we've discovered a planet and
there's another planet right next to it
it has almost the same conditions it's
in the so-called goldilock Zone where
the temperatur is just right to have
liquid water which Mars can have on it
at certain times of the year and certain
places on Mars it had flowing water on
it we know for sure Mars had flowing
water on it we know for sure that
material from the earth got there when
Earth had life on it so the absence of
Life on Mars is a data point it's not
pro probative or probative or just
positive rather that life couldn't exist
on Mars we haven't searched all of Mars
but it at least shows there there's an
impediment to it so people are lot fond
of saying as I told you earlier there's
about 10 to the 24th um planets probably
in our observable universe going back to
the Big Bang going out to the farthest
reaches of the universe but even if you
just take the Milky Way Galaxy there's
probably you know literally 10 Bill
hundreds of billions of planets in our
galaxy alone and um when you look at
that people like to say as Carl Sean did
if there's no life it's an awful waste
of space right why is there so much
space and there's no life that seems
incomprehensible but nature you know I
love when atheist scientists will say
like you propose God exist and that's
the god of the gaps to explain things
that you don't understand but when
science advances we'll have an
explanation for why you know Thunder
occurs it's not because of Thor right we
get rid of gods as we learn more and so
the god gaps shrink smaller and smaller
but they'll say the same argument about
life in the they'll say well there's God
to be life because there's so much room
there but as I told you I've been in
Antarctica twice the only life forms I
saw there okay were people um I saw a
few penguins in the distance and a
couple of dead sea lions there's no
trees there's no Flora at all on the
entire continent it's incredibly Barren
and yet Andrew it makes up 8% of the of
the land mass of the Earth
wow and you would think well it's just
proportional to the amount of area I.E
the number of stars there should be 8%
of the life on Earth there should be a
billion people there whatever you know
600 million PE no there's nothing there
except for scientists that go there so
the the odds of life you know are you
can't construct probability from
possibility that and many many other
arguments that I could give you the the
the improbability of Life how hard it is
to create life and you know if you just
sprinkled imagine you had a koala Cannon
okay people like Peta are going to get
you just go to Mars and spray it with
koala it's obviously not going to like
would probably be okay with you
populating with the an area with koalas
a Canon to take out koalas they would
probably that's right they would not
like that so yeah so probab uh you know
possibility is not probability uh the
number number of hurdles to create a a
single cell is enormous uh we have yet
to reproduce you know to make a
functional cell in the laboratory not
that that's a requirement to prove that
life could Exist Elsewhere just saying
it's very hard our history of life we
have an N of one it's very difficult to
speculate on and if we're alone if if
life is abundant as fery asked many many
many years ago um if life is abundant
and the Galaxy is is old where are they
where are the aliens there should have
been plenty of time not only for them to
evolve and and be superior to us in many
ways and travel the distances of the of
our our galaxy not even of the cosmos of
our galaxy where are they where are they
they've known about us for 80 years
because we've been broadcasting radio
waves for the last 85 years do you know
this theory about the gut microbiota you
know our our guts our skin our eyes our
nose but certainly our D entire
digestive tract um the whole way down
from our lips um out the other end our
populated with these little microbiota
that influence everything from fatty
acid production neurotransmitter
production Etc influence more than human
cells right yeah oh yeah and it's
powerful for modulating all sorts of
biological processes and um and every
time we interact shake hands if people
kiss if you interact with dirt if you
interact with a pet you the the
microbiome changes it's a it's an inner
uh reflection of of all your outer
behaviors and internet yeah yeah and
then we're learning a lot about it that
there's this one theory that I like that
um kind of turns life as as you and I
know it on its head which is that um
humans and other species are just
vehicles for the microbiome and that you
know and so you would take something
like the desire to uh like like uh
populate Mars or to shoot or to land on
the moon as just the microbiota you know
taking advantage of this weird old world
primate species that we call Homo
sapiens that loves to develop technology
almost destroy itself but then continue
to to uh evolve social media Etc warn
each other about declining birth rates
and then just to to basically the
microbiota have a what you know a sort
of quote unquote Consciousness not a
brain but consciousness of their own
which is like all species to make more
of itself go further and further out and
populate it's hard to punch holes in the
logic of this of this model but it it
certainly diminishes our our conscious
experience um we could go on forever
about uh this Trail I I'll just kind of
put a kind of a cliffhanger out there
it'd be wonderful sometime to sit down
with you and discuss the possibility of
rather than thinking about life
elsewhere in the
Galaxy given what we know about physics
and Engineering astronomy Etc would it
be be possible to build a planet at the
appropriate distance from the Sun that
we could spawn Life by bringing things
there as opposed to trying to take it
you know figure out how to how to do it
at a at a distance that it might not be
amendable to life right you know maybe
creating a garden Planet maybe we don't
put humans there right away um but
trying to create a garden that could
Thrive at the some appropriate distance
from the Sun um and seeing what what
what nutrients could be grown there you
know so you could have robots man this
this planet but you'd have to somehow
aggre
um stuff in space to build this planet
or launch this planet up that it would
collect things I mean that to me feels
like a fun experiment and a lot less
risky than going up up to other planets
um yeah I was I was blessed as my first
guest on the anth The Impossible podcast
that Freeman Dyson now you mentioned
with your dad your dad mentioned him uh
one of the greatest intellects of the of
the last hundred years great physicist
and he had these ideas for these Dyson
spheres which would be you know uh
energy harvesting so the first you know
ingredient that you need to construct
the the Hu
you Planet uh uh habitable zone is to
have uh is have energy it Harvest as
much energy as possible from a star so
he he basically conjectured a a mega
structure an alien mega structure that
could be observable by astronomers could
detect these these objects and and some
have claimed that we have but those have
always been refuted and it would be
basically surrounding a star capturing
every Photon worth of energy that came
out of it and then converting that to
mechanical energy and then yes and then
once you have Infinite Energy you can
actually do Fusion you could make up
whatever molecules you want you could
make up you know print 3D printing at
the at the Quark level on up basically
and so that was his you know conjecture
of how super Advanced aliens would
behave but again we have no evidence for
it but it's fun it's certainly fun to
have the science fiction you know kind
of you know a lot of interesting science
you know originates from ideas and
creativity that originates from science
fiction so that would be a lot of fun
you and I could talk about the Stars the
planets Optics animals here on Earth um
infinitely um this is what happens folks
when two real uh real nerds get together
and want to learn from one another and I
hope U you delighted in this at least um
half as much as I did uh those of you
listening um I mean you occupy an
incredible place and I mean that you
know like your your intellectual place
since you were a child is is a
remarkable place um that most
people I think don't occupy not because
they don't have the training but because
they just haven't put their mind on
there on these questions and I think one
thing that's so clear is that through
your podcast your books and certainly
through the discussion today um you've
placed Us in the in the position of
scientist um to be able to let Ponder
these these really big questions about
really big really distant things is is
not typically the way that my brain uh
functions I think most people are uh
more focused on things proximal to them
and and here on here on Earth but I'm so
grateful that you that you did and um
and I'm so grateful that you continue to
educate we didn't even get to talk about
but I'll just mention that you've been
a absolutely spectacular proponent for
um Popular Science Education and the
importance of that I've been very
inspired by you and your work thank you
uh very inspired by your story um sure
because of some similarities and you
know Fathers and Sons and the
tribulations Etc different but some some
overlap there but also just because of
the way that you approach life um and
it's very clear to me that as a person
who's focused on things very very far
away where apparently there there's no
observable life yet not yet
um that you're also very grounded in in
this thing that we call daily life and
the Delight of of of exploration and
asking questions and uh if ever there
was a a call to arms for people to get
outside and look at the stars perhaps
through a telescope or perhaps through
the telescopes on the front of their
their skull um certainly to do that and
to think about some of what was
discussed today because I I'm certainly
Enchanted and I I know those listening
and watching are as well so thank you
for everything you do keep doing it come
back let's keep talking we didn't talk
about God in the universe and um the
origins of life but we'll do that before
long and uh Brian keing thanks for being
you I appreciate you thanks Andrew
you've been a big inspiration to me too
and you know use your language thank you
for your interest in science it's really
done uh so much for the world and you
give it all for free and it's uh it's
truly an inspiration and it's really fun
to talk to somebody who's you know at
the level that you're at and so many
different things and still has that you
know as scientist we get inured we get
kind of used to things oh there's a
rainbow there's a meteor you know
whatever but you still have that passion
you have that passion that Curiosity and
I think that's what makes a true
scientist and the the function of
Education seems to beat that out of kids
but um but really to have that in the
domain and the expertise that you have
is is a real inspiration and I think
it's a huge service to society so I want
to thank you too thank you well it's a
labor of love mixed within Affliction so
we'll keep going right back at you
thanks Brian thanks Andrew thank you for
joining me for today's discussion with
Dr Brian keading I hope you found it to
be as informative and indeed fascinating
as I did to learn more about Dr King's
work his podcast his book and other
resources please see the show note
captions if you're learning from and or
enjoying this podcast please subscribe
to our YouTube channel that's a terrific
zeroc cost way to support us please also
click follow for the podcast on both
Spotify and apple and on both Spotify
and apple you can leave us up to a
five-star review please also check out
the sponsors mentioned at the beginning
and throughout today's episode that's
the best way to support this podcast if
you have questions for me or comments
about the podcast or topics or guests
that you'd like me to consider for the
huberman Lab podcast please put those in
the comment section on YouTube I do read
all the comments and if you're not
already following me on social media I
am hubman lab on all social media
platforms so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter Facebook threads and
Linkedin and on all those platforms I
discuss science and science related
tools some of which overlaps with the
content of the hubman Lab podcast but
much of which is distinct from the
content on the hubman Lab podcast again
that's huberman lab on all social media
platforms for those of you that haven't
heard I have a new book coming out it's
my very first book it's entitled
protocols an operating manual for the
human body this is a book that I've been
working on for more than 5 years and
that's based on more than 30 years of
research and experience and it covers
protocols for everything from sleep to
exercise to Stress Control protocols
related to focus and motivation and of
course I provide the scientific
substantiation for the protocols that
are included the book is now available
by pre-sale at protocols book.com there
you can find links to various vendors
you can pick the one that you like best
again the book is called protocols an
operating manual for the human body and
if you haven't already subscribed to our
neural network newsletter the neural
network newsletter is a zeroc cost
monthly newsletter that includes
everything from podcast summaries to
what we call protocols in the form of
brief 1 to three page PDFs that cover
things like how to optimize your sleep
how to regulate your dopamine we also
have protocols related to deliberate
cold exposure get a lot of questions
about that deliberate heat exposure and
on and on again all available at
completely zero cost you simply go to
huberman lab.com go to the menu tab and
in the top right corner scroll down to
newsletter and enter your email and I
should mention that we do not share your
email with anybody thank you once again
for joining me for today's discussion
with Dr Brian keading and last but
certainly not least thank you for your
interest in science
[Music]