welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Becky
Kennedy Dr Becky Kennedy is a clinical
psychologist and one of the world's
foremost experts in parent child
relationships now you may or may not
have children if you do today's episode
is absolutely for you if you don't
well you were once a child perhaps
you're even still a child today's
episode also will have valuable
knowledge and tools that you can apply
to your life today Dr Becky Kennedy
teaches us an immense number of
extremely valuable tools for the
workplace for romantic relationships for
family relationships of all types not
just parent child relationships and of
course also for parent child
relationships we discuss themes that
have not been discussed previously on
the hubman Lab podcast topics such as
guilt which Dr Becky Kennedy offers a
completely unique perspective on one
that I've never heard before and that
frankly I don't think anyone has heard
before in fact she distinguishes between
what most people think is guilt and an
entirely different set of emotions and
offers you very useful practical tools
for when you experience guilt and how to
work with guilt we also extensively
discuss frustration or what she calls
frustration tolerance frustration
tolerance is an extremely important
theme for everybody to understand and
apply in their lives because frustration
tolerance as Dr Becky Kennedy so aply
points out is Central to the learning
process of anything at every age if you
can understand this concept and you
apply some of the very simple rules and
tools that Dr Kennedy explains during
the podcast I assure you you can learn
many more things much more quickly and
with much greater satisfaction if not
during the process certainly at the end
when you master that learning and those
are just a few of the themes that we
discussed during today's episode again
whether or not you have children I
assure you that today's episode is going
to be immensely beneficial for all of
your relationships you will notice
during today's episode that our studio
backdrop is different you will notice
that for once I was not wearing this
particular style of shirt the reason for
that is that this episode was recorded
during the LA fires what was initially
called the Palisades fire and then
spread to multiple fires throughout LA
County so we were not able to access our
normal studio so I want to express
extreme gratitude to Rich Ro our good
friend in the podcasting space who
allowed us to use his podcast Studio
which is where I'm seated now and where
I held the discussion with Dr Becky
Kennedy first off our entire team our
homes and our studio are fine I can
assure you of that but most importantly
our thoughts and our prayers go out to
the people who have lost their homes
lost pets and sadly there have been
fatalities during the LA fires so our
thoughts and prayers are with them and
their families and we hope everyone
remains safe before we begin I'd like to
emphasize that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at
Stanford it is however part of my desire
and effort to bring zero cost to
Consumer information about science and
science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme
today's episode does include sponsors
and now for my discussion with Dr Becky
Kennedy Dr Becky Kennedy welcome back
I'm so happy to be here grateful to Rich
R for Lending us his Studio under the
duress of fires in Los Angeles I'm
praying that his home is okay um it's
unclear at this moment but in any
event let's talk about emotions both
theory and practice and if we can place
it in the context of parenting that
would be great but I'm certain that this
has a broader theme that pertains to
everybody so I love the theory of
emotions or how we would theoretically
respond to something but then there's
the reality so as a parent let's say um
you have a stance in your home and in
your family that it's okay to be safe
sad like sadness is normal it happens it
passes Etc but let's say you're feeling
particularly sad about
something do you express that and show
that in front of your kids because I've
also heard that young kids in particular
younger than eight or
nine perhaps shouldn't be aware that
their parents are experiencing say
extreme sadness because it can be scary
to them where they might feel like their
world is destabilizing and then um we
ALS hear a lot about kids feeling like
they had to parent the parents and then
this whole thing becomes pretty
complicated so while there's no perfect
world where um one knows what to do
every single time how do you look at
this business of modeling emotions and
also encouraging kids to be able to
experience and express their emotions
yeah and I think everything I'm about to
share applies you know in the workplace
right like can of Boss be you know
really upset in front of the person they
manage management right so it's all the
same stuff so I guess zooming out as a
start
emotions are normal emotions are
unstoppable you can't not feel sad just
because you have your 5-year-old in the
room right and I think the other thing
that kind of forms my perspective is
it's really hard to not show someone
that you're sad like you might think
you're doing that well but kids are
extra perceptive they are actually built
to be more per receptive than we are
because their survival depends on adults
so they have to always notice is my
adult around is my adult okay so they
really attune to what's going on for us
right and so I think the kind of
question is less do I show my emotions
to my kid or not and it's more okay if
I'm sad my kid is going to notice what
do I do then and as a principle one of
the things I think about often is
information
doesn't scare kids as much as the
absence of information scares
kids so let's say there's let's say
there's something really awful I don't
know as a parent you're your family
member someone died of cancer I don't
know there's something really horrible
that you just found out right there's
wildfires right now let's say you
evacuated and you found out your house
burned down you're sad your child is
going to notice that and you want your
child to notice that you don't want your
kid to be a teenager and adult who goes
around the world unable to pick up on
emotional cues from other people that
that that's not adaptive and so the
patterns we set with our kids when
they're young
inform their view of the world when
they're older and so here I am let's say
it's the situation of somebody dying and
I'm upset first of all as a parent tell
yourself it's not my kid seeing me sad
that's going to destabilize them it's
seeing me sad and me making up a bogus
story or denying it because then my kid
goes pretty sure my mom was upset oh
she's not oh she's pretending like
nothing happened oh she looks sad but
she's saying she's not sad that is
really upsetting it would be like
hearing your boss say oh yeah 20%
layoffs what are we doing I don't know
oh hi everything's great how are you
like what is happening scary what you'd
want is your boss say you just heard
something you were right to hear
that we are about to go through a really
tough time I'm stressed about it that's
why I yelled you might be stressed
here's what I know this is going to be
hard and we're going to get through it
together now all of a sudden that
emotional experience has a container it
has a story humans need Stories We like
stories and so often we think it's the
emotions that dis regulate a kid it's
the lack of a story to explain it so
let's say this really did happen people
always say to me okay but Dr Becky like
my kid is four I'm going to say that
their aunt died they don't even know
cancer right we don't have a better
alternative I can't even tell you how
many parents I've seen whose kids have
all of these issues because of the
madeup stories I just said she went to
sleep for a while 6 months later my kid
has a lot of trouble sleeping through
the night yeah they haven't seen their
aunt who went to sleep one time you know
creates a huge issue no matter what
bogus story you make up kids can handle
the truth and they can handle the truth
when it's told to them from a loving
trusted adult it's kind of like me and
you someone can tell us a hard truth but
it's from someone you feel safe with and
that you feel like also believes in you
and says it honestly it might be hard
but it doesn't feel awful so it's about
saying to your kid you saw me crying one
of my favorite kind of sentences to say
to kids around this cuz I think it
really builds their confidence it's just
you were right to notice that I was
crying and I'm feeling sad and look you
saw that I'm going to tell you
why making this up a Aunt Sally died do
you know what dying means dying is when
someone's body stops working then I'd
pause right this one to be a monologue
I'll see how my kid responds I might
add I'm not dying kids actually really
need to hear that in hard times I'm not
dying no one else is dying I'm safe and
you know what I'm sad and I'm still your
strong mom who can take care of you that
sets the stage for such resilience and
is kind of the opposite of everything's
fine my kid keeps seeing me crying they
keep hearing words they're not used to
hearing die cancer Aunt Sally funeral
whatever it is that situation is what
makes kids feel really really
uncomfortable and
unsafe so it's the absence of
information that causes the harm yeah
and it's the lack of coherence between
what they're observing and feeling and
kind of this like open loop um if I kind
of place it in neuroscienc terms I feel
like the brain does think in the terms
of in terms of stories stories have a
beginning middle and an end and they
kind of want to know where where they
are in that story that's exactly right
and the terms I would use for to match
your terms are um coherent narrative
what is therapy why does therapy help
people it's interesting therapy doesn't
change what happened to you therapy
doesn't change your past therapy does
not take away the pain but the pain was
never the thing that really got in our
way it was the pain plus a lack of a
coherent narrative and support and so
early on when kids have Painful
experiences from witnessing you or
something else giving them a coherent
narrative is what they need and without
that the way I think about it is they
have what I call unformulated experience
it's just affect an experience that kind
of free floats in their body
unformulated that tends to later show up
as triggers right and kind of other
things in adulthood and so yeah that's
what we want to try to avoid when we can
I'd like to take a quick break and thank
one of our sponsors wealthfront I've
been using wealthfront for for my
savings and my investing for nearly a
decade and I absolutely love it every
January I set new goals for the year and
one of my goals for 2025 is to focus on
saving money since I have wealth front
I'll keep that Savings in my wealthfront
cash account where I'm able to earn 4%
annual percentage yield on my deposits
and you can as well with wealth front
you can earn 4% apy on your cash from
partner Banks until you're ready to
either spend that money or invest it
with wealth front you also get free
instant withdrawals to eligible accounts
every day even on weekends and holidays
the 4% apy is not a promotional rate
there's no limit to what you can deposit
and earn and you can even get protection
of up to $8 million through FDIC
Insurance provided through wealth
front's partner Banks wealthfront gives
you free instant withdrawals where it
takes just a few minutes to transfer
your money to eligible external accounts
it also takes just minutes to transfer
your cash from the cash account to any
of wealth Run's automated investment
accounts when you're ready to invest
there are already over a million people
using wealthfront to save more earn more
and build long-term wealth earn 4% apy
on your cash today if you'd like to try
wealthfront go to wealthfront.com
huberman to receive a free $50 bonus
with a $500 deposit into your first cash
account that's wealthfront.com huberman
to get started now this has been a paid
testimonial of wealthfront wealthfront
brokerage isn't a bank the apy is
subject to change for more information
see the episode description today's
episode is also brought To Us by
ourplace our place makes favorite pots
pans and other cookware surprisingly
toxic compounds such as the pases or
forever chemicals are still found in 80%
of non-stick pans as well as utensils
appliances and countless other Kitchen
products as I've discussed on this
podcast these PES or forever chemicals
like Teflon have been linked to major
health issues such as endocrine
disruption gut microbiome disruption
fertility issues and many other health
problems so it's really important to
avoid them this is why I've recently
fallen in love with ourplace products as
especially one of their cooking pans the
titanium always pan pro ourplace
products are made with the highest
quality materials and are all pasas and
toxin-free they're beautifully designed
and function extremely well as I
mentioned I love the titanium always pan
Pro from our place I cook eggs in it
most mornings and the titanium pan is
designed in a way that allows the eggs
to cook perfectly without sticking to
the pan I also cook burgers on it and it
really puts a nice sear on the burger
without the meat sticking to the pan
it's extremely easy to clean and like
all our place products it's nice to look
at when sitting out on the counter or
stove for a limited time ourplace is
offering an exclusive 20% discount on
their Innovative titanium always pan Pro
designed to last a lifetime and
completely toxin-free visit fromourplace
decom huberman and use the code save
huberman 20 to claim the offer with a
100 day risk-free trial free shipping
and free returns you can experience this
game-changing cookware with zero risk I
can't help but put this Neuroscience
lens on this cuz I find it so
interesting that what you're basically
saying if I understand correctly is that
until we can place things into a story
which is really a sense of beginning
middle and end a sense of time it just
reverberates in US I mean I think I
can't help myself you know we we've I
don't want to give the impression we've
got fires burning all around us in terms
of this building but with some distance
between us and the fires that's actually
true and I think one of the things
that's so uh destabilizing for kids and
adults in this this kind of circumstance
is that we don't know how this is going
to work out we just don't and of course
none of us have a crystal ball uh we
can't peer into the future yeah but it's
the not knowing that you know really
extends our brain resources and I can
imagine that for a kid seeing their
parent upset and then hearing well no
I'm okay I'm okay um would create this
kind of open loop where then the kid has
to worry about it like like when will
this come to an end um one question
about expressing sadness in front of a a
child and if let's say somebody
expresses why they're sad is it okay to
AC to accept um consolation from the kid
because we hear so much that you know we
shouldn't have to parent um as children
we shouldn't have to parent our parents
and this is a big theme especially on
social media nowadays like were were you
the parent to your parent you know were
you the one that took out the trash when
someone else should have done it and
therefore you took on more
responsibilities I don't want kids to
think they shouldn't take out the trash
but you know what I mean or but if
you're calling a parent about a lost job
if you're the parent the kid rather that
is sort of goet between the parents is
sort of acting as therapist we we hear
about this a lot a lot and I think a lot
of people peer into their past and and
say yeah I I did I grew up way too fast
yeah so on the other hand I think we
would all agree that being a empathic
person um teaching our kids that if
somebody's crying you walk over to that
person perhaps and just say you know do
you want me to sit with you or maybe do
nothing at all maybe offer a solution
maybe not but at least you know provide
some sort of support that seems healthy
but the basic question is should parents
accept consolation from children when
the parent is sad or experiencing some
other negative emotion I think this is a
great question there's a couple things
that are coming to mind so first of all
all of this is a matter of extent and
patterning yes we do not want our kids
to feel like it is their job to take
care of our emotions it's not a good
situation and I think the difference
here actually comes down to what the
true definition of empathy is to me
empathy is noticing someone's feelings
and caring about them it's not taking
care of them that's a big difference so
let's say I'm crying and my kid comes
over and this whole situation maybe
somebody died and like oh my goodness
mom can I give you a hug and do you want
me to get you a cup of water okay I just
want parents know you don't say no no I
do not want you to be a parentified
child like like that is so that is so
kind yes that would feel great okay
that's totally fine I think the line is
and every parent just knows this forsel
where it might get to oh you know
what I love that you're noticing I'm sad
and I love that you care about that and
I also want to let you
know those are my feelings not yours and
I am really able to take care of them
myself with whoever is a friend um and
you're still really allowed to be a kid
who can go play who can go have fun who
can even not listen to me once in a
while when I say it's bath time that's
actually your job so let's go do our
jobs well and to me that comes down to
what empathy is the delineation of like
what is a parents job and what is a kids
job um but also I think all of this can
get misrepresented in this in social
media and I don't want parents to think
that they always have to chastise their
kid for acting in a caring way yeah I
feel like kids are as you said before
kids are so perceptive about what their
parents are experiencing and they'll
create or move towards all sorts of um
emotional gymnastics in order to work
with that years ago I saw I think it was
a YouTube video with Jim Carrey who
basically revealed that he became
funny as a way to make his sick mom
laugh that he grew up with a very sick
mom which is chronically ill and so he
would like throw himself down the stairs
and try and make her laugh or do you
know he was an incredible like world
class physical comic um among other
aspects of of Comedy but that his whole
career was born out of this childhood
tendency to notice that his mom was
really hurting and try and basically
make her laugh make her feel something
good and it you know now I'm thinking
about this because it's just incredible
the way that kids can pick up on
something and then and try and find a
solution to it yeah you know I could
imagine that for kids who have a sick
parent could be a mental um challenges
or physical challenges that they've got
to notice yes and um in the case of Jim
Carrey one could argue whether or not it
was adaptive or not adaptive he had this
you know meteoric career but um
eventually just left it decided that
wasn't what what he wanted to do um but
leaving that extreme example
aside let's say a parent is sick with
the flu or is grieving the loss of you
know God forbid a spouse or um or or
something really major yeah uh at what
point does the parent need to say listen
I'm really
hurting this is
bad and I can handle it when that might
not actually be true so the question is
you know uh how how much information to
give kids yeah because you don't want to
lie to them on the other hand you don't
want them to feel the burden of of
needing to worry about a circumstance
and I'm framing this in the context of
sick parent but I'm also raising this
thing of um Financial worries a close
friend um who told me that growing up
their parent was like constantly dealing
with you know moving from one job to the
next it was like this issue of whether
or not we're going to have enough
resources to get through the next year
was a constant question and this person
is now in their mid-30s and you you can
tell it still haunts them and it's
completely shaped their relationship to
work and finances yeah yeah I mean I
think we can we can think about this
compared to what would I want from my
boss I have a boss who's I don't know
going through a really hard time or
having a really hard time at home and I
kind of notice it I'd probably want my
boss to level with me and say kind of
again you're right to notice I'm going
through a hard
time but at what point would it feel
like o am I safe in this
organization right I I I I think we
probably all have a point there and I
think it's the same thing with kids kids
really do need to feel like they have
sturdy parents again I always go back to
Pilots because I think airplane examples
are so powerful because there's very few
times in adulthood that we actually feel
like our safety is truly dependent on
another adult like 100% when you're a
passenger in an airplane you are 100%
dependent so it's kind of the closest
Dynamic and you can imagine what it
would be like if the was saying going
through a really hard time who wants to
come in and give me you know I don't
know you know tell me a nice story like
oh my goodness like I okay you're going
through a hard time but this is really
not feeling great right um and what that
means and which is you know kind of even
a larger point is if you're a pilot you
need to make sure you're really doing a
lot of self-care more than the average
person because of this outsized
responsibility you have this is what I
think about parenting and it's why from
you know bigger theme Here is this is
what gets me out of bed you know every
morning so motivated is not just to help
parents understand Tantrums or emotions
or you know the latest struggle in their
house although I actually love that it's
to say hold on like we've been really
sold like an awful story about what it
really means to be a parent and how
parenting really first and foremost is a
journey of self-care how can I be the
sturdiest person possible who do I need
in my life when things go poorly so so I
don't lean on my young children and give
them a responsibility that is not theirs
you know I I was just saying to someone
the other day that when you have
kids all of the unhealed parts of your
childhood come right before your eyes
they are just triggered over and over
and over with your own children like you
know oh my kid's whining I can't deal
with that oh well whining is probably
trickling because it's kind of
Representative of helplessness what was
it like in my family if I kind of felt
helpless was that allowed did I grow up
in a you know if you don't stop crying
I'll give you something to cry about
family okay if I don't resolve that I'm
going to act that all out on my children
and pass that along so all of kind of
these situations where parents are
feeling all these different emotions
from a trigger from something in their
life I I think it goes to what I always
tell parents you know you have a first
and foremost job of self-care and taking
care of yourself that doesn't mean
traveling to Europe for the year and
leaving your kids alone it means what is
going on inside you what skills do you
need what networks of support do you
need what do you have around you to help
you on the hardest journey of your life
and the most rewarding one of being a
parent so that you don't have to say to
your kids you know oh you know can you
kind of take care of
me Paul kti who came on this podcast to
do a a series about mental health not
just mental challenges but also mental
health which is an interesting Concept
in its own right um has been quoted as
saying that you know that if you were to
list out the hundred most important
things for romantic relationships it
would be self-care and communication
repeated 50 times and I'm thinking about
that now because sounds like a pretty
good model for pretty much every
relationship yes self-care communication
and I must say the first time I heard
him say that it wasn't on uh my podcast
it was on a different podcast sort of
surprised I thought self-care first but
the way you're framing it um seems to me
that if self-care comes first or at
least very high on the list of what
parents should do it frees up the kids
to live and experience life with a lot
more ease yeah lot more a lot more peace
yeah and to basically unburden them of
about 50,000 jobs that's exactly right
and I think self-care has has gotten you
know misrepresented it doesn't mean
getting a manicure every week it could
if that does it for you but when I think
about self-care and I really think about
the work we do with parents at good
inside we always say good
inside and like our app it's not
parenting it's for parents it's for the
Journey of what it means to be a parent
it's for your own stuff it's for your
triggers it's for finally learning how
to set boundaries it's about finally
learning that it's okay to get your
needs met even when they inconvenience
others it's learning that your Rel
relationships are strong enough that
they can get through hard moments where
people are upset with you right it's
about finally saying to if you need to
your mother-in-law we can't have any
visitors on Saturday and the reason I'm
finally able to do that is because I
understand my self value and all this
stuff this has nothing to do with the
fact that your kid isn't sleeping at
night but that is the foundation for
intervening in the way you're proud of
when your kid is waking you up at 2 in
the morning right so that is the
self-care it's really like a not just
self-care it's self- establishment it's
self-growth
really I don't know the psychology
literature or clinical literature around
this but I'm thinking about um speed of
emotional
shifts in my own experience of Life U
I've known moody people um and I've
known not as moody people I Define Moody
as people that whose moods fluctuate
quickly and sometimes spontaneously but
this but this idea that um some people
are like steady as a rock is a is a
great concept but we also know that we
need to feel our emotions Express them
to some extent and yet there are people
where uh if we were to plot this it
would look like a high frequency wave
where some people are really upset then
they're feeling better again they're
upset then they're feeling better again
I'm not talking about extreme pathology
here I'm talking about um you know
someone cuts them off in traffic and
they're pissed but then they're fine um
they're very very happy about something
they see so it doesn't always have to be
negative but then they're kind of like
flat AFF effect and then they're into
you know something negative I think that
experience of emotions is so far and
away different from the experience of
emotions um emitted from somebody who
you can kind of see the emotion coming
it's like a slow swell it's like a it's
like a expansion and then a contraction
again that you you have time and I feel
like I keep coming back to this theme of
time perception but anytime we have time
or we hear about like in the all the
Buddhist Traditions like space like
you're trying to create mental space and
you know this gap between stimulus and
response it all sounds great but with
some people you have to really be on
your toes or perhaps you disengage and
so I've never heard a satisfying answer
to this probably because I've never
asked it out
loud if you're a kid or if you're a
parent and somebody is experiencing
something let's say they're really angry
or really
happy you can imagine riding that wave
in with them you could also Imagine
sitting back from it and some of this is
probably what we call temperament but
maybe you could talk about this a little
bit um in the context of having one or
both parents that's kind of a like a
high frequency shifts between emotions
versus kind of a slow expansion and and
um and then settling of emotions because
I feel like those are two completely
different experiences of Life yeah I
mean I think you're speaking to how
differently we feel emotions I mean you
know I think about one of my kids who I
call a deeply feeling kid right so my
image is always she's just more porous
to the world and so if you think about
someone who's more porous that their
pores are literally wider a lot more is
going to come in and guess what a lot
more is going to come out right and
she's a kid who by the way you're in a
certain area in New York City she's like
I can't be here the smell for me I'm
wired differently I was like I literally
don't smell anything different now does
that mean she's wrong no I I actually
bet knowing her she smells things and
then she lets me know how awful it is
and she can't stand on that corner and
for me in that moment at least cuz we're
probably all volatile in different ways
I look steady as a rock right um I have
another kid who yeah is pretty steady
until he feels like his authority and
power is threatened and then you better
watch out you know and so in one moment
someone might see him as oh wow that
kid's really volatile but in probably
90% of other moments
he's kind of cool as a cucumber so I
also think it's important to categorize
kids not as like always one way or
another but we all feel emotions
differently none of them is wrong or
right to me the goal is to not be locked
into any one thing that to me rigidity
is always the enemy that that's what
holds us back in adulthood if we're
always one way I can never handle
someone cutting me off in traffic
because the emotion takes me over I have
road rage yeah that's not good that's a
very rigid limited way of living life
but it's probably also limiting to say
I've never really gotten riled up about
anything forget road rage but it's kind
of amazing to get riled up once in a
while and to feel really passionately
about something and to feel something
enough that you want to go do something
about it right so there's no morality on
it I think what's tricky I can even say
as a parent of three kids is each of my
kids I always kind of imagine this if I
have all these different parts of me
they each need a different part of me to
kind of lead like they almost need
different lead parents right so my kid
who is my deeply feeling kid I know
what's so important is that I believe
her experience and I better be ready
with certain boundaries because she
feels things so intensely especially
when she was younger I have to step in
more often there's more difficult
Behavior right my kid who's really
really
steady I try to sometimes even though
it's convenient CU he's so easy you know
there's definitely a lot going on in
there and sometimes I wonder does he
almost feel like all the emotional space
is taken up by his siblings and the only
thing left for him is kind of steady as
a rock and that can lead to a rigidity
later in life right so I think these are
like Moving Systems so much of how we
experience emotions growing up is also
dictated by the system and kind of the
roles our siblings play um and so I
don't know if that kind of gives you
enough of an answer um but that's very
that's informative yeah I think the
thing I really want parents to know is I
think we place a lot of morality on it
and if we're honest with ourselves we're
probably just comparing our kid to how
we do things so if you're someone who's
pretty steady you're like my kid is
crazy they're dramatic right if you're
someone who's a little more out there
you're not as bothered by that kid and
then you have another kid you're like
that kid's kind of boring right because
they're so flat and so I mean I think
this is true in couples too whenever
we're fighting we're probably just
saying why can't you be more like me
when we're triggered by our kid we're
like why can't you be more like me right
that's probably what are always saying
to each other going back to
communication but if you take a little
different perspective of hold on a
second there's no wrong or right way to
feel emotions some behaviors are not
allowed but all the emotions have
information and what might my kid need
right now instead of oh my goodness is
my kid messed up or why is my kid not
just a little bit more like me how
useful is it to talk to kids about
emotions when they're not happening I
mean to me this is something like I I
always just say I always phrase it as
emotion talk right
just knowing that emotions live within
you knowing that there's names for them
that they're normal that they make sense
to me it's like the ultimate leg up in
life it's like it gives your kids such
resilience because we we can't beat our
emotions I feel like we've been trying
that for Generations like if I just only
didn't feel so angry or so jealous are
so sad our emotions are so Primal in our
body and I I really do believe emotions
they're information that's what they are
why would we ever want to not get the
information our body is giving us and
sometimes it's almost dramatic what
happens in an amazing way like so many
people I think about so many times of
people in a room for therapy they start
crying I'm so sorry you're feeling
something so intensely that your body is
producing water from your your eyes to
get your attention like that's that must
be really important information why are
we saying sorry and as far as we know a
a uniquely uh human thing I could be
wrong about this but a colleague in uh
of mine at Stanford and psychiatrist um
Carl daero talked about this um that
humans are the only species that we are
aware of that sheds tears for sake of
emotion yeah other animals they have
lacrimal glands they produce you know
water so to speak salty water that comes
out of their their eye region but uh not
as it relates to emotions at least we
don't think so so that's a great example
like I even think about a conversation I
have had with my kids and I like to just
have these moments here and there
whenever I talk about good conversations
with my kids I think people think I have
these 45 minute no they're they're
usually 10 seconds I say one thing my
kids say can I have a snack now and I
think that's a great conversation
because I know it gets in
there do you know that tears have really
important information for us
be like what what did you say I'm just
thinking so many people think tears are
bad tears are kind of amazing it's like
our body is trying to stop us and it's
like asking us to pay attention to
something really powerful I just think
it's kind of an amazing thing our body
does and my kid goes can I have pretzels
oh sure I'll get you pretzels that that
to me is a win I just want to tell
everyone I love it that is a 10 out of
10 I'm bragging to people about that
like I had the best
conversation because I know this is
seeping in mhm because in the moment my
kid is crying you think it's going to be
helpful when my seven-year-old is crying
tears are amazing they're like f you Mom
no one wants to hear that my reflex
would be to tell them uh the biology of
Tears Nome Soo who was on the podcast
told us that tears contain hormones that
signal to other people phermones excuse
me that literally change the biology of
the people around you we can actually
smell tears we don't realize we're doing
it see here I go so you tell I realize
you tell a kid I spent enough time with
with kids that if you you tell them that
they're like whatever but you know when
that's a great conversation around the
dinner table and again your kids will
roll their eyes that kids roll their
eyes about everything I always think
rolling their eyes or stop is kind of a
kid's way of saying there's a lot coming
at me on my own person I just need to
push it away a little so that on my own
time and under my own control I can take
it in and we take ey rolls or whatever
it is so personally that then we end up
getting into a parish go why are you
rolling my eyes and we miss this
opportunity if we just say nothing then
our kid is going to take in what we just
said just walk away let the whole
process happen you know it's kind of
like if your boss comes in and says
something like oh look that project
really wasn't as good as it you know
could have been and I really need these
things done and you're like and then
imagine you're rolling your eyes at me
if your boss just leaves the room you
probably
think I didn't do that as well as I
could I'm going to go work on it right
so I feel like not taking the bait is a
very important parenting tool but I
think those moments with our kids to
talk about emotions and to talk about
our
own especially when it comes to struggle
right I one of the things I think a lot
about I try to be intentional with my
kids especially when they were younger I
just
think kids are flooded by their parents'
capability and it is so hard to learn in
environments where someone's capability
is so far beyond your own like I'm not a
good cook but if I was really learning
to cook I I would want to learn from
someone from here or there you know
burned some garlic or messed up the
broccoli and then was was like okay well
I guess I could do this next time I'll
be like okay but if I'm learning to cook
from someone who is whatever celebrity
chef I like that's that person's like
way too far from me and I almost feel
shame so I think about this with our
kids and how this relates to emotions
where when your kids are younger
especially if you just think about the
first 10 minutes of their day they're
trying to figure out maybe how to brush
their teeth how to go to the bathroom
how to turn on the sink how to wash
their hands they always put their shirt
on the wrong way they can't get on their
socks there's so many things and you
come out dress perfectly and then
they're like I can't get out my socks
and you go like this okay one two and
kind of in those moments I always think
that's I'm just kind of saying to my kid
I can do everything easily and they
don't know our history they don't know
we struggled to put on socks for 5 years
too I put on my shirt backward you know
until College they don't know that and
so I think again in these calm moments
you have this opportunity to say
something like I cannot finish this
crossw word puzzle or like I love New
York Times games right and it's so fun
with my kids now that they're older but
my connections was really hard today I
just I really struggled with it and I
was like oh I can't do it I can't do it
and then I took a deep breath and I
tried it a little more and you know
maybe I said and I did it or or I Didn't
Do It Whatever it is and it gives my kid
first of all gives my kid an opportunity
to just notice that I struggle too it
gives my kid again kind of an arc and a
story of oh someone I admire so much
every kid admires their parents they've
had hard times they still have hard
times they work through things they burn
garlic they can kind of talk themselves
through it um that is such a more
powerful kind of lesson in Emotion
regulation than teaching your kid kind
of directly yeah it also seems that um
we're here we're not defining the age of
the kids but if one presents themselves
as um perfect or close to it in any kind
of relationship work romantic parenting
Etc um sooner or later you're going to
fall from grace because they're either
going to be looking for the mistake or
the moment you make a mistake it's going
to be this fracture in the picture that
people had of you and I have to say um
and I think some people might get
irritated or even um dare I say
triggered uh by the language I'm about
to use but I feel like the
real like ninja move in all this is to
acknowledge that there are power
dynamics between parent and child but
then to try and dissolve the power
dynamics and I say this in the context
of having run a lab for a long time
which is very different than raising
small children but you have people who
are coming into your laboratory they are
they if they're your graduate student or
postto they're they're staking their
whole career on your ability to teach
and mentor and a lot is at stake Nothing
is for for certain they might not get a
job the papers might not work out that
you know and so there's just so much
tension around it and um and so as a pi
as a principal investigator in a lab I I
remember feeling that pressure of like
it's got to work out and one of the best
things that ever happened to me as a
graduate student was that my first paper
took forever to get accepted and we
almost got in and then it didn't get in
and then finally it got in such that
every paper after that felt like a
breeze because it took so damn long the
first time and I got to see that my
advisor couldn't like make magic happen
and fortunate fortunately that's the way
the scientific process is supposed to
work and I think about this in in the
context of parenting like if you if
you're seen as Invincible you know we
hear about this like people say I
thought my dad was Superman I thought my
mom was Superwoman you know and then but
you can imagine what how disappointing
it must be when they discover anything
about a lack of capacity or or a break
in emotional stability Etc so how does
one present themselves as both um
powerful in the positive sense of the
word yeah such a such a thorny word but
powerful in the positive sense of the
word but human and vulnerable to making
mistakes yeah in a way that you don't
give up the essential let's just call it
what it is a power Dynamic with your
kids so that the kid then doesn't feel
they have to parent you I love this
topic because it's it's so interesting
right now it's kind of review season at
good inside because I also I'm the CEO
of a company and to me the things I talk
about with parenting and my kids and for
other people parenting their kids they
are the exact same principles exact as
leading a team and so when I think about
review season and the way we get
feedback and the right and back and
forth it it brings us all together and
I'll explain so the other day I said to
my
kids I love resolutions I actually do
love resolutions right because I love
just the opportunity to say what is one
small thing I'm like I value and I'm
going to hold myself accountable to do
what I said to my kids was I want you to
come up with one thing just one thing
for now and it has to be something like
manageable and real that I could do that
would really make me a better mom to you
you asked your kids this I asked my kids
this I actually asked my kids this
relatively frequently it's like a review
right um because it's something I do at
work all the time and what I say at work
is cuz often my d report like nothing I
said I just want to tell you something I
need one thing from you by the end of
the day I need it because like I know I
know I can get hot I know I can get a
little reactive right um I know I'm
always go go go and there probably is a
moment that you know I need to pause I I
I know I know I have a lot of issues so
if you don't tell me one thing I don't
trust you as much so here's what
happened with my kids at that point it
was only two of them it just happened
the other day my son
says my seven-year-old
son sometimes when you're trying to get
some work done at home and I want to get
your attention for something this is
what you do Mom one minute one minute
one minute and then you still don't give
me he's he's clock I'd rather you tell
me 5 minutes and then give me your full
attention that's literally I I I was
just like that is a really good
suggestion and I really needed to hear
that
I can do that this was a couple days ago
okay I have to
admit two days
ago he was trying to show me something
and he just goes you're doing it you're
not really giving me your attention and
I said you're right thank you change is
hard I actually do need about 2 minutes
is that okay and then you'll I'll put my
computer down cuz I'll sometimes look at
him and like kind of look you know and
he goes okay it it was kind of it was so
so beautiful my daughter said at night
she goes it's so interesting when you
give people this opportunity how
generous they can be with you I think
it's been true at working home my goes I
know when it's my bedtime at night I
always want to do one or two extra
things I know I always have to get my
water Mom it's just how I am that's what
she said and you get this rushing voice
and you go come on it's bedtime and
that's like the last voice I hear before
bed and I really don't like that voice
and so can you just know that I always
need to do those one or two extra things
and not use that
voice and again I said you know what I
wouldn't want to hear that as the last
voice you know and I think at night
especially is a little
digression one I always feel like I'm in
a rush I don't I don't know extra two
minutes with my kids like my kids are
getting older they're not even in my
house for that much longer I just have
to remind myself I'm not in a rush like
this is the best use of my time so I
said and that one I've been really good
at and so how do we show our kids that
we're fallible one way is actually like
asking for feedback especially when you
have older kids when you have a teenager
this is the number one thing that can
change things around you know what I'm
thinking about it's hard to be a teen
and I'm definitely not a perfect parent
of a teen I'm sure you have a long list
but for right now can you name one thing
that I could do that would make me a
better parent to you and I want to
follow this through cuz what a lot of
teens will do or parents will say my
teenager tells me something ridiculous
they'll say well you know how you make
me charge my phone at 900 or 10:00 p.m.
out of the room you could let me sleep
with my phone which maybe parent like
I'm just not going to do that or they'll
say you know what you could do you could
give me $1,000 every week for an
allowance right and so parents will say
my kid doesn't take it seriously this is
where like to me one of the most
important life skills parenting
management friendships it doesn't matter
is differentiating someone's words on
the surface from their needs or their
feelings or their fears whatever it is
underneath and not responding to the
words but kind of cutting under them
let's even same I could said the phone
thing what would be so great about
having your phone just help me
understand it I know in my head I'm
never going to do it but we don't
realize just cuz we're not going to do
something someone asks it doesn't mean
we don't owe that person the right to
try to understand why they want it right
so I might just ask questions it might
probably end with look I actually hear
what you're saying all of your friends
are on Instagram until midnight it
sounds like you legitimately do miss out
on conversations by the time you get to
school you feel out of them like I'm not
even joking I feel like if I was your
age i' feel like that's like basically
the worst thing ever I believe you
having your phone after X time is just
one of my non-negotiables it's actually
just cuz I love you so much that I feel
like my job is to protect you I wonder
if there is some other way that we can
figure that out or my kid says $1,000 I
might say what would you do with $1,000
oh you go oh you want to go to more
concerts oh your friends all get more
allowance tell me more no matter what
your kid says to you there's information
so I think feedback is one I think
repair is another way repair is the most
important relationship strategy to get
good at and I just hope everyone hears
the duality in that and realizes what
that means because if you're going to
get good at repair
you have to mess up the only way to
repair is to mess up and so if I'm
telling you get good at repair I am
telling you you have to accomplish step
one which is yelling at your kid you
have to and you're going to do it anyway
I do it but if you then tell yourself
wait I'm getting good at repair Step One
is messing up I crushed it amazing I'm
half the way there then when you repair
which is when you take ownership I'm
sorry I
yelled just like you I'm managing my
emotions emotions are really tricky
emotions are really hard and do you know
what even though you're going to have a
leg up on this compared to most people
when they're adults cuz you're learning
how to regulate emotions you're still
going to be practicing that when you're
my age that is my responsibility to work
on it's not your fault and I love you so
powerful I'd like to take a quick break
and acknowledge our sponsor ag1 ag1 is a
vitamin mineral probiotic drink that
also includes prebiotics and adaptogens
ag1 is designed to cover all of your
foundational nutritional needs and it
tastes great now I've been drinking ag1
since 2012 and I started doing that at a
time when my budget for supplements was
really Limited in fact I only had enough
money back then to purchase one
supplement and I'm so glad that I made
that supplement ag1 the reason for that
is even though I strive to eat most of
my foods from Whole Foods and minimally
processed foods it's very difficult for
me to get enough fruits vegetables
vitamins and minerals micronutrient
nutrients and adaptogens from food alone
and I need to do that in order to ensure
that I have enough energy throughout the
day I sleep well at night and keep my
immune system strong but when I take ag1
daily I find that all aspects of my
health my physical health my mental
health and my performance both cognitive
and physical are better I know that
because I've had lapses when I didn't
take ag1 and I certainly felt the
difference I also notice and this makes
perfect sense given the relationship
between the gut microbiome and the brain
that when I regularly take ag1 which for
me means a serving in the morning or
midm morning and again later in the
afternoon or evening that I have more
mental Clarity and more mental energy if
you'd like to try ag1 you can go to
drink a1.com huberman to claim a special
offer for this month only January 2025
ag1 is giving away 10 free travel packs
and a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again
go to drink a1.com huberman to claim the
10 free travel packs and a year supply
of vitamin D3 K2 today's episode is also
brought to Us by ju ju makes medical
grade red light therapy devices now if
there's one thing that I have
consistently emphasized on this podcast
it's the incredible impact that light
can have on our biology now in addition
to sunlight red light and near infrared
light have been shown to have positive
effects on improving numerous aspects of
cellular and organ Health including
faster Muscle Recovery improved skin
health and wound healing improvements in
acne meaning reductions in acne reduce
pain and inflammation improved
mitochondrial function and even
improving visual function itself what
sets Tu lights apart and why they're my
preferred red light therapy device is
that they use clinically proven
wavelengths meaning specific wavelengths
of red light and near infrared light in
specific combinations to trigger the
optimal cellular adaptations personally
I use the ju whole body panel about
three to four times per week typically
in the morning but sometimes in the
afternoon and I use the ju handheld
light both at home and when I travel if
you'd like to try ju you can go to juv
spell
jv.com huberman Ju is offering an
exclusive discount to all hubman lab
listeners with up to $400 off select ju
products again that's juv
jv.com huberman to get up to $400
off I love love love this thing about
asking for a request it's different than
asking for feedback which could quickly
lead to a list of all the things that
you one does wrong as opposed to a
request for how one could do better yeah
so I think there's an important
distinction there and then it seems that
the question that uh the parent or who
knows the boss or whatever maybe it's
with a romantic partner needs to ask
themselves is you what is this request
really about yeah like what's underneath
it I'm just paraphrasing essentially
what you said and what's it really about
is it a request for more autonomy for
more social connection with other people
and then one starts to realize it
certainly in this um example that you
gave of uh a child asking for more time
with their phone later at night is that
it actually has nothing to do with your
relationship to them it's really about
their relationship to their friends yeah
could be and the fact that they might
feel as if they're missing out yeah and
um that leads me to another question
which is what if you as the parent
partner boss
Etc keep your phone close to you until
mid midnight and they know that yeah so
one of the worst things that I believe
anyone can say is you know do as I say
not as I do it's just it's just such an
a like blatantly arrogant stance of
you're supposed to do what I say because
I say so but I'm not going to do it
because I don't want to um and yet there
are times like in parent child
relationships or boss employee
relationships where you're telling
somebody to do something and you
yourself are not going to do it or no
longer do it or choose not to do it and
in reality you don't have to and maybe
there's a good reason why you don't or
don't have to that's the nature of
that's why I use these uh words um power
dynamics which which everyone hears and
goes oh boy here we go but but it is an
issue of power dynamics you have more
power than than the kid so what you're
doing is you're giving the kid power to
express where they want more agency I
like the word maybe agency more than
power yeah um did you grant your son the
uh the right to use his phone later into
the evening my son my son not to pry
into your personal my son did not ask me
that and he knows that our phone rules
are non-negotiable I didn't mean to pry
into your into your family Dynamics but
that if that's a rule you would never
give it to them but I think so many
times and then we'll get back to
Power we shouldn't be afraid to learn
more I I I actually just think that's
what it is our kid says all my friends
get this that's not true why don't you
just learn more oh they do tell it's
like learning more about what someone
says doesn't mean you ever have to
change your boundary most of conflict is
about a lack of understanding anyway
when you learn more you're trying to
understand understand your kid
understand you're someone wants a raise
and you think it's ridiculous you can
learn more tell tell tell me what's been
going on what have you been doing like
learning more about someone's position
does not weaken your position and I
think that's really really important in
any form of leadership now in terms of
the power dynamics there is something
about the word power that like you know
is that weird yeah I mean I think the
way I think about it and what we do at
good Insight a lot in terms of our
leadership and parenting style I don't
use the word power but think it's about
embodying your
Authority parents have authority Pilots
have authority bosses have authority
because they're the
ones kind of who have the job of setting
up the whole system for success that's
their job right my job isn't to make my
kid happy my job is to help create the
conditions for my kid to be like a real
functioning confident buil that's what I
believe right a pilot job is definitely
not to keep passengers happy it's to get
everyone safely on the ground a boss's
job is not to keep everyone happy is to
set up the conditions for health and
success of the business right now if you
know that's your job it's no one else's
job but the CEO I mean to some degree
all the management but that is their job
and so there's a difference where if the
CEO believes a job needs to be done a
certain way it's not that they have
power it's just their role involves
having that Authority and if someone
else disagrees it's up to them to say
you can keep the job or not it's just a
diff have different roles so and I
actually think owning that very outright
it's actually something I recently said
at work in a review around something I
really wanted and kind of owned like in
my role as a
CEO like that is under my role to decide
this is important and now we have to
figure it out let's see I would love
some input on how we're going to get
this done same thing for a kid one of
the lines I said over and over and over
to my kid when they younger and I see so
many good inside parents tell me that
their kids reflect back to them later is
my number one job is to keep you
safe so what does that mean that kind of
relates to power it can mean why am I
not letting my kid I don't know jump up
and down on our kitchen counter it's not
cuz I'm pissed that my kid isn't
listening I'm not letting them jump up
and down on my kitchen counter where
there's a light above their head because
my number one job is to keep my kid safe
is that power I mean I guess I think
it's Authority how would I embody that
Authority I would say it looks hard for
you to get down I'm about to pick you up
and put you on the floor because I have
authority right we get to this phone
discussion let's say and I really do
believe that the phone has to be charged
out of the room at a certain time I'm
going to understand I'm going to
understand I'm going to listen hopefully
I'm connected to my kid and they feel
respected by Me In A Million Ways and it
might lead to me saying look my number
one job still is to keep you safe and
that really means making decisions that
I really believe are good for you
shortterm and long term even if you're
upset with me this is one of those times
and so I love you this might be a point
of conflict I know we're going to get
through this and that is my role as a
parent and it comes from a place of
wanting to protect you and and I think
when you embody your Authority in that
way kids never say thank you and they
will roll their eyes and kids always
feel loved and protected Ed they really
do I hear it from my kids you know and
maybe this this is so true sometimes
things happen with my kids and I'm like
no one's going to even believe this but
I was walking with my seven-year-old the
other day and I said what does it mean
to be a good parent what does it really
mean I'm curious really thought he
goes means you're kind of strict and I
said what do you me strict
CU you have certain rules that you think
matter and he goes but it also means
like you also have to be loving and
fun my heart like hurts hearing like
myself say this like in a good way
hurting like they know I think kids know
and maybe he says that because that's
what we are but I think kids know and I
can't even tell you how many kids I used
to work with and teens especially the
pain of their P of their parents not
embodying their Authority was so clear
they knew that they shouldn't be out at
a certain time they knew that they were
hanging out with kids who were like bad
news and their parents had no idea and
they felt unanchored like they really
really knew not that their parents
weren't exerting power that word isn't
their parents weren't embodying their
appropriate authority to protect their
kids I had something come to mind which
is not a a phrase that I've ever used
before or heard before um but what comes
to mind is kind of um statements of
stance
yes I feel like statements of stance in
parent child relationships families
workplace romantic relationships Etc are
great when they're about actions or
about sort of overriding themes like no
matter what I'm trying to keep you safe
I might not get everything right but
like that is like non-negotiable
internally and I'm going to try and make
it non-negotiable externally like it's a
statement that stands about actions like
um or you know keeping you healthy and
safe is my number one priority th those
are facts those are things that one can
really say and believe and and you know
until the end of time be trying to uh
incorporate into one's Behavior but I
feel like statements of stance about
emotions are very dangerous like um we
don't yell in this
house um you know uh it's okay to cry
right there's always a caveat of course
it's okay to cry right um but there are
times when crying is less appropriate
there's times when um yelling might be
appropriate uh there's times when um
emotions need to be expressed or not
expressed in a particular way because I
look I don't think I'm alone in thinking
that you know the kid tantruming in the
um in a public environment is an
embarrassing thing for them for their
parent for people around and it's not
the end of the world right it's a
tantrum for goodness sake right like uh
people will survive but I feel like
statements of stance about emotions kind
of hold us to this standard that we'll
never be able to meet but that
statements of stance about
action are you
know until we fail and you know hope we
don't yeah um we can say things like you
know my job is always to keep you safe
I'm always going to try and make the
best decision for you and for your
sister right for instance but I think
that many people I'm not just speaking
from my own experience but in talking to
friends and um and others that they grew
up in homes where like there were these
philosophies these like statements of
stance and the moment that things didn't
match that statement of stance like the
whole concept of what parents and
children are supposed to be about just
kind of started to dissolve and it
creates that underlying fear like do
they even really know what they're doing
yeah or maybe they don't know what
they're doing but maybe they're trying
so in any case it's um it's just
something that maybe we could um yeah
talk about for a moment I have some
reaction to that I think I mean I kind
of think you're talking about values and
principles right and so I think there
are in my house to be honest it's not
like we have some wall of like these are
our family values that's I mean some SE
yeah that's not on the refrigerator not
organized enough to to do that but if I
thought about a couple that come to mind
like my job is to keep my kids safe by
the way safe does not mean they're never
in a situation without risk that's not
what I mean um you know but in general
that's his own form of danger exactly
the minimization of risk is also not
safe right so but my job is to keep you
safe I'm not going to let you do things
that you know endanger yourself for
others so that's one another principle I
think about is
um I will always tell you the truth even
if it's uncomfortable like you can
always count on me for that we call that
kind of I call that truth over Comfort
right so if my kid says to me how are
babies made that that value is useful
right um another thing is like all
feelings are allowed not all behaviors
are okay right stuff like that what
about we we don't swear in this house so
what I was about to say and then you're
on the phone and then you scre up and
then the kid goes you swear to me what's
very different is these kind of
rigidities around Behavior we don't
swear swearing is a behavior we don't
cry in public Behavior we don't tantrum
here that's a behavior behaviors all the
time are a manifestation of feelings
that overpower skills so saying we don't
do certain behaviors it to me it it
doesn't even make l I sense well what if
I'm in a situation where I have a really
intense emotion and don't have the skill
to manage it we don't that's the
behavior is going to happen and then I
feel like a bad person they're very
that's very different than values around
intention I want to be truthful with my
kids even if things are uncomfortable I
might fumble around with the words right
I might even sometimes lie because I
didn't do that value in action but what
I can come back to is okay nobody lives
their values 100% of the time so I think
we're talking about actually something
core to what we think about a good
inside which is I'm a good person with
values who is totally imperfect and
sometimes acts in ways I'm not proud of
both are true when families have values
that are very behavior-based what ends
up happening in the kids is they start
to equate certain behaviors with
morality these are good behaviors that
make me loved in my family and these are
bad behaviors that kind of make me feel
like I'm not the right part of my family
and they even make me wonder like am I
lovable am I good inside after all right
am I worthy that that's not good because
whenever we tie Behavior to Identity
that's shame and we've tried to motivate
kids with shame for for hundreds and
hundreds of years and it and it and it
does not work and causes a lot of
problems I think another one which is
interesting especially as my kids get
older I said this to my teen recently
this is really tricky one of my jobs as
always has been to create guidelines and
rules with you you know it's always
going to be kind of collaborative some
because of my authority will be
directive that I believe are going to
keep you safe and I think this really
relates to a phone I want to tell you
another part of my job that might sound
contradictory but I actually think we
just need to hold them both at once
another part of my job is to be there
for you when you inevitably go against
those
guidelines and I want you to know that
we have rules around what can and cannot
be done online and I'll say serly and
like if you do kind of become part of a
really inappropriate text conversation
if there is bullying if you do come
across some images online that make you
feel really uncomfortable and you're
like I shouldn't have seen that like
you're not getting in trouble with me
I'm not going to throw you a party like
I I will be there for you to help you
through those moments those things sound
contradictory and in our family we know
two things can be true and those are
both true right to me that that's really
important thing for a teenager to know
let's talk about guilt and shame yes
I've heard some kind of catch phrasy
stuff not from you but like oh you know
guilt is about the thing you did and
shame is a feeling about who we are and
you know I while I'm not against those
sort of um 1990s early 2000s kind of
psychology isms I feel like they're not
very useful in the same way that hearing
that there's a gap between stimulus and
response and if you identify that Gap
well then goodness you're going to be
the kind of person that can feel feel
stressed but not be reactive you're
going to be responsive not reactive
that's just a bunch of words that
doesn't here I'm a biologist so I'll
just say doesn't take into account the
fact that the biology of stress changes
your perception of time and a whole
bunch of other things that basically
make that gap between stimulus and
response much much smaller and I think
once people understand that they go oh
so like the the kitchen refrigerator
magnet or the poster on the wall that
says you know like there's a gap between
stimulus and response it was supposed to
save me but it didn't of course not like
we're just in different states of mind
at different times
so how do you define no pressure here
but um but how do you define guilt
versus shame right
and what about guilt and shame great two
of my favorite topics I have a couple
different ways of defining things I I I
I'm like you to me I I like defining
things in ways that are very concrete
and very usable that's all and if
there's multiple ways of doing that
that's great so the way I think about
guilt this will probably set us off in a
direction about what is not guilt also
is guilt is a feeling I have when I act
out of alignment with my
values and in that way guilt is a really
useful feeling real useful because it
makes me reflect on wait I didn't act in
line with my values I wonder why what
would I have had to do differently what
got in my way wow I'm so glad I have
that information from my body to have
this deeply uncomfortable feeling to set
in that process right so if I yell at my
kid I'm going to feel guilty right I I I
think about a time when my kid told me
you know I lied to you I did take that
eraser from that kid in school and I
feel really guilty and I said first all
I'm so glad you told me that I'm I'm so
glad you're feeling guilty that's the
right way to feel now there must have
been something so hard about seeing
something so shiny and fun that you
don't have I totally get that and
you're right that's not in your values
to take it so that's a useful feeling
that feeling is going to help you not do
something like that again let's figure
out what you can do not just to say
sorry this is what parents miss you know
what's going to happen another time
you're going to see something else
pretty cool someone's cubby and you know
what most people think I'm going to take
that you're going to have the thought
again I would too what can you do the
next time you have that thought right
all of this comes because of guilt
useful feeling guilt is a feeling you
have when you act out of alignment with
your values now Tam meil is one of the
most misunderstood feelings because what
you hear all the time and you'll hear
how much it kind of conflicts with this
definition is something like
this I haven't seen my friends in years
there's finally a dinner but it would
require me not to put my kid down to
sleep you know and I'm talking to
someone I'd say okay well I'm guessing
you're not leaving your kid alone yeah
my husband or my mom someone who's a
totally safe
adult but Becky I told my kid and she
was clinging to me like no Mommy I
needed to be you I need to be you and so
I'm not going to dinner do you know what
I'm going to say Andrew because I feel
so guilty this is right oh someone asked
me to be in the PTA meeting and I'm so
busy I can't but I can't do it because I
feel so guilty
okay again I'm just curious is like well
it sounds like you really want to go to
dinner with your friends she like oh I
do all I do as parent these days I
literally haven't seen these friends in
years they're in town and he said tell
me about your friendships that's me you
do I value my yes I know that I'm kind
of more than just someone who puts down
my kid for bed and I love doing that but
but this matters too so I said this is
really interesting you really value your
friendships your life right now feels
out of balance and that your friendships
that part of your burner of your stove
is like really low okay okay and you're
not going because you feel guilty I just
want to share an idea guilt is a feeling
you have when you act out of alignment
with your values it seems like going to
dinner would be in line with your values
and almost it's like yeah that's true so
what is this
feeling and here's what I think the
feeling is I call it not guilt just
because I haven't figured out a more
sophisticated term but here's what I
think is happening a lot of us
especially women when we were growing up
we learned to notice every everyone's
feelings around us and we learned that
our value really and our worth
really and we were kind of best and good
girls when we took care of everyone
else's feelings except for our own I
think so many young girls especially
become
expert at what people need of them by
becoming distant from what they need for
themselves the picture I get in my mind
is sort of like having anteni cast in
every direction that's right except
perhaps at the exclusion of of paying
attention to
theeni that are inward exactly and we're
and we are um you know attentional
resources are finite I mean we we just
don't have the capacity to right
like respond to other people's emotions
and feel at the same time to the same
degree that we would if we just
concentrated on theirs or our emotions
that's just a fact of how humans work
yeah and kids are are oriented by
attachment they have to learn with their
families how do I become the most
lovable safest version of myself so I
have a friend who it's true I remember
her even in middle school I can't come
my dad's traveling and my mom really
needs me to stay home and watch a movie
with her right and I I know this mom
well it's like oh you don't love me you
don't right I mean this was so she
became expert at always noticing other
people's emotions and not only noticing
them taking the emotions from them kind
of like taking them into their body and
almost metabolizing them for
them that's not guilt that is taking
someone else's emotions and taking them
into your
body at the expense of taking care of
your own needs and so I have a visual
for this because I think it's really
powerful where let's say it's the
situation where a mom is saying I really
want to go out to dinner but I feel so
guilty first thing is just powerful to
say that is not guilt it is something
else and it is real and it is powerful
but it is not guilt
what is happening I'm on one side of a
tennis court like me and you Andrew but
let's say it's a tennis court and you're
on the other side or even This and like
in between instead of Anette it's like a
glass table over here I am here in my
desire to go out with my friends because
I do value my friendships okay over
there is you're upset about it and let's
say instead you're my daughter like no
no don't go no one else can put me to
bed that is definitely hard to deal with
but that is your daughter's feelings
those are not your feelings those are
your daughter's feelings and some of us
SL a lot of us have developed this
tendency where we're on this court and
all of a sudden all those feelings from
your side somehow go through that wall
and they come to your side and you call
it guilt it is not guilt and to me one
of the most liberating things and this
actually relates to empathy as I always
say is to give that feeling back to its
rightful
owner because what that means is if I
really give it back
now I have a boundary that's my kids's
feeling that's not mine and I can now
actually empathize people said no I was
empathizing I wasn't going out no no no
no that's not empathy you weren't going
out with your friends because you
couldn't handle the distress in your
body you just made your Fe daughter's
feelings your own you just engaged in
someone something almost selfish this
has nothing to do with your daughter in
those situations that's why we say weird
things to our four-year-old like don't
you want Mommy to have friends I feel
like Four's like why are you asking me
that question
it's like a pilot being like don't you
want me to make an emergency landing
like if you need to make an emergency
landing don't ask me for permission
because once I give it back to my
daughter I can do this I can say you
really wish I would put you to bed
tonight you're right it feels so
different when Grandma does it oh it
does I'm going out it's okay if you're
upset I'll be back and I'll kiss you and
I'll see you in the morning and then
this next part is so important when you
walk out I don't want any person having
any illusion that the daughter is going
to be
like yes you go girl no she is going to
scream that's okay going back to the
boundary you're allowed to take care of
your needs and other people are allowed
to be inconvenienced and upset by it it
doesn't mean your needs are wrong it
doesn't mean their feelings are wrong
and it definitely doesn't mean you feel
guilty
I'd like to take a quick break and
acknowledge one of our sponsors element
element is an electrolyte drink that has
everything you need but nothing you
don't that means the electrolytes sodium
magnesium and potassium all in the
correct ratios but no sugar proper
hydration is critical for optimal brain
and body function even a slight degree
of dehydration can diminish cognitive
and physical performance it's also
important that you get adequate
electrolytes the electrolytes sodium
magnesium and potassium are vital for
the functioning of all the cells in your
body especially your neurons or your
nerve cells drinking element dissolved
in water makes it extremely easy to
ensure that you're getting adequate
hydration and adequate electrolytes to
make sure that I'm getting proper
amounts of hydration and electrolytes I
dissolve one packet of element in about
16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up
in the morning and I drink that
basically first thing in the morning I
also drink element dissolved in water
during any kind of physical exercise
that I'm doing especially on hot days
when I'm sweating a lot and therefore
losing a lot of water and electrolytes
they have a bunch of different great
tasting flavors of of element they have
watermelon Citrus Etc frankly I love
them all and now that we're in the
winter months in the northern hemisphere
element has their chocolate medal
flavors back in stock I really like the
chocolate flavors especially the
chocolate mint when it's heated up so
you put it in hot water and that's a
great way to replenish electrolytes and
hydrate especially when it's cold and
dry outside when hydration is especially
critical if you'd like to try element
you can go to drink element.com huberman
laab to claim a free element sample pack
with the purchase of any element drink
mix again that's drink element.com
huberman laab to claim a free sample
pack today's episode is also brought To
Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes
Smart mattress covers with cooling
Heating and sleep tracking capacity now
I've spoken many times before on this
podcast about the critical need for us
to get adequate amounts of quality sleep
each night that's truly the foundation
of all mental health physical health and
performance and one of the best ways to
ensure that you get a great night sleep
is to control the temperature of your
sleeping environment and that's because
in order to fall and stay deeply asleep
your body temperature actually has to
drop by about 1 to 3° and in order to
wake up feeling refreshed and energized
your body temperature actually has to
increase about 1 to3 de eight sleep
makes it incredibly easy to control the
temperature of your sleeping environment
by allowing you to control the
temperature of your mattress cover at
the beginning middle and end of the
night I've been sleeping on an eight
Sleep mattress cover for nearly four
years now and it has completely
transformed and improved the quality of
my sleep eight sleep has now launched
their newest generation of the Pod cover
the Pod 4 ultra the Pod 4 ultra has
improved cooling and heating capacity
higher Fidelity sleep tracking
technology and even has snoring
detection that will automatically lift
your head a few degrees to improve your
air flow and stop your snoring if you'd
like to try an eights Sleep mattress
cover go to 8sleep.com
huberman to save up to $350 off their
pod 4 ultra eight sleep currently ships
in the USA Canada UK select countries in
the EU and Australia again that's eights
sleep.com
huberman wow I say wow because um I
think the lens that you're looking at
guilt through and the way you're
defining it is so very different than
the way it's been discussed ever and I
think this is a super super important
topic um so I'd like to lathe into it a
little bit
more in some
ways the way that I think many people
experience guilt at least according to
your definition which um by the way I
love um it's when we've act out of
alignment with our values um versus
feeling
pressure like I think about I mean Lord
knows I don't have the best reputation
as getting uh having a short text uh
response latency um it's variable
sometimes I'm quick on the draw and
other times I'm like oh goodness it'll
be days or weeks I mean over the
holidays I was spooling through it I
would respond to people like a week
later and um you know I do my best but
but I do often feel um quote unquote
guilty about not being as responsive in
text to a number of people because I
care about them yeah I value them yeah
um but I get overwhelmed by text
messaging very easily to the point where
I have to put my phones out of the room
when I work etc so the way I experience
a bunch of text messages coming in is as
pressure yeah that then I feel guilty
I'm not trying to make this about me but
no I want to let's go into this I have a
lot to say I feel quote unquote guilty
but do I really feel but what's
interesting is you know I believe in
cognitive dissonance and then what I
notice is that then my brain tries to
bridge that Gap I come up with these
like justifications with like well when
I text people and they don't respond for
like two weeks I don't get upset which
is true unless it's in a particular sort
of right category of circumstances so
how come the way they view this whole
dynamic is not the same as the way I
view this Dynamic okay maybe this is a
more male Centric view as opposed to
feeling porous like I feel their they
upset but I will say you know In
fairness to um all the chromosomes and
their Arrangements I do feel bad yeah
like it sucks I love these people and
they're reaching out to say whatever
happy New Year or something and I'm
feeling pressure as opposed to feeling
yeah how wonderful it is to have people
in my life so here here here this is
such a beautiful example where I I'd ask
myself or I'd ask you to ask yourself
okay I already you already named one of
your values which is interesting I
really value my relationships you said
that okay that's one value and I think
this is I'm G to ask you this question
do you value quick responses all the
time from you on text message is that a
value of yours from me or to me from you
do I value always responding to people
on text right away the truth is if I'm
really honest yeah I hate um shallow
exchange of any kind except maybe a fist
bump to somebody you just kind of feel
some kinship with on the street and you
have that connect and you just give them
the fist bump great but I like more
in-depth lengthy connection like three-h
hour long conversation three hour long
conversations or drop a friend came by
the other day for um New Year's he was
on my list of people that and yes I made
a list of people that I want to deep in
my friendship with in the in the New
Year came by we had a 2hour lunch we
chatted and and I feel like it was
awesome and worth a million single line
text messages and I'm also the kind of
person where like I'm good to not see
him for a while not because I'm tired of
him but because I also have other
friends and things to do right so I'm
more of a depth not breadth kind of guy
this is to me this is such a powerful
process and then after this I kind of
want to link it back to how I've
actually told my kids
about why I do go out to dinner with
friends right so you're like I value
deep relationships I value relationships
I value deep relationship but and with
I'm if I'm honest with myself responding
to someone right away that's actually
not my value but again we can hold
multiple things at once that doesn't
mean I don't care about those people I
just laid out all my values what I think
is so powerful as a not guilt diffuser
is naming this directly to the people so
doesn't have to be on text but you're
see person X and you know I'm never that
good I just want to tell you I I really
value our friendship I really value
these times we have together something I
just also want to get off my chest is
going back and forth quickly on text
that's not something that's easy for me
that I do very often and so you might
text me and it might take me a while and
I I just wanted to name that to you
right now look someone else always has
the right to say well that's interesting
that doesn't work for me one of my top
values with friends is someone who's
always getting back and forth to me
that's actually great great now we know
okay what are we going to do about that
that's fine you know where someone
stands and the reason I relate this to
the situation with going to dinner is I
remember early on when my daughter said
why do you have to go to dinner with
friends or why do you and Dad this was
it why do you and Dad go to dinner
without us I know the couple you're
going out with you both have kids why
can't you bring us right and this is
where we say we feel guilt but we don't
cuz I'm like time out she's feeling this
feeling not me and also I don't need her
permission or approval that's the real
parentified thing we like go to our
seven-year-old and we're like don't you
want me to have adult conversations
again not it's not an atypical response
I've heard parents do that like don't
you want me to have a social life but
you know what it
is it is asking your kid to do your job
for you again can you imagine a pilot
say do you think we should make it an
emergency landing it you'd be that's how
a kid feels when they're asked that
they're like why are you asking me that
here's what I said to my daughter in
that situation I really did I want to
tell you something I love being your mom
I I really do it's one of the most
important things in my
life I also really like being married to
dad and I really like the times we have
when it's just us and other adults
that's really important I remember
saying this maybe I was really trying to
Double Down we actually we we had that
before you guys were here you like what
yeah um and so one of the reasons I want
to be honest with you why do we go to
dinner without you it's not so much we
go to dinner without you we think of it
as going to dinner with each other and
just adults is that something we really
enjoy it's really important to us it's a
really important part of us and that's
why like being really vocal about your
values as opposed to looking to your
child unconsciously to give you
permission to have those values if you
want to use power that's a power that's
a power move and it's amazing this is
true in any time in life the more you
can locate someone the more you respect
their boundaries I I use that word a lot
and know like locate I'm sure you know
people in your life like can I locate
them you kind of know who they are you
know what they
value and you respect them right when
you can't locate
someone you feel very uneasy around them
you're kind of like where are you who
are you what do you stand for and as you
can see with my daughter it was a I
wasn't saying something mean I I was
saying something true and so I think
with the friendships and when you say is
this guilty it's like well maybe my step
and my action is just actually being
honest with this person I'm not very
good at responding right away I want to
let you know I deeply care about our
friendship I'm not very good at
responding to kind of small talk over
text and I just wanted to let you know
that so you didn't misinterpret it like
I I wonder what would happen I wonder if
people would kind of respond really
positively I love it and I I can't help
but recall when I was a kid um after
dinner my dad would sometimes take a
walk by himself now granted he's a
physicist and he was he's a theoretical
physicist so he's like all his
experiments were in his head and he did
work on paper too but um so he would
take these walks and occasionally I'd
see him coming back from these walk and
um he'd be smoking a cigar something he
doesn't do anymore unfortunately um I'm
grateful that he's very real boss he was
actually a guest on the podcast recently
talked about science and um life Etc and
one of the things that I remember
thinking and still to this day think and
feel is it's kind of awesome how he
takes this walk and he looked like so
happy with the cigar and his thoughts
and he' walked and I wanted to be on
those walks with him he was very very
busy in fact I wanted a lot more time
from him than I got it's kind of
interesting cuz now it's often times
that I'm the busier one um the table's
turn kids um but in all seriousness I
didn't think of it as self-care but it
was so clear that that was his time yeah
that was absolutely his time and I knew
when I could and should join for things
and when I didn't and so when you say
the more you can locate someone the more
you respect their values I feel like
Bells go off it's like exactly that and
there are other examples of my mom Etc
but
it's kind of interesting when we see
somebody adult or child like really in
their element of their thing yes it's
almost like we love them for it and
through it and and it fills us I think
in with a with a healthy sense of of
safety like they're right there kind of
like the pilot flying the plane really
well like actually we don't really want
to know about the pilot I want to hear
the thing at the beginning where about
take off I actually don't like it when
we're landing and they say we'll be on
the ground in just a few moments I'm
like we're at 10,000 ft can we make it a
little bit longer than that but you get
the point which is that I don't want to
hear from the pilot I just want the
pilot to fly the plane you want the
pilot to do their job and again in these
you know I think I have so many pilot
metaphors around sturdy leadership and I
think it really is such a metaphor for
how we teach people the skills they need
to parent because again no one becomes a
pilot overnight it's no one becomes a
CEO overnight no one becomes a lawyer
overnight or a professional basketball
player you know I think we actually
lawed CEOs these days who say I don't
know how to do leadership as well as I'd
want to I'm getting executive coach you
all want to work for that person right
the amazing athletes in the world get
amazing coaches and they go to amazing
training camps because they're amazing
right and so I just somehow with
parenting it's like the last area where
people think I should become an amazing
parent overnight I shouldn't have to
invest in skills or education even
people who invest in skills and
education for every other area of their
life that they probably care about less
there's so much shame we've internalize
that we should be able to do it
naturally and you do become a parent
overnight you become a parent over you
do I'll remember my graduate adviser had
two kids while I was uh working in the
lab saying that there were all these
books back then about pregnancy and she
was like it's wild there are all these
things of what you should eat and
shouldn't eat and how you should you and
your partner and how you should prepare
for the birth and all this and then they
like and then at the hospital they're
like here and you're like uh now granted
that was in you know the early 2000
that's still what it is and they're like
what do you need and they go you need a
car seat to leave the hospital which by
the way you definitely need that that's
all like just a car seat like how am I
supposed to manage this because the
thing I want parents to know because
again there's just so much shame and
maybe we should talk about shame right
is
um the only thing that comes naturally
when it comes to Parenting is how you
were parented that comes naturally that
lives in your bones that lives in your
circuits and and there might be some
people who say amazing I have the
greatest privilege in the world then
what will come naturally is exactly what
I value and what I want to do I would
say more often people would say some
version of definitely not what I want to
do or parts I'll take Parts I want to do
differently and to me it's kind of like
if you were brought up speaking English
and you really want to speak Mandarin or
you want to speak Mandarin half the time
to your kid and someone said are you
going to learn Mandarin na naturally I
feel like someone say how how does one
learn Mandarin naturally you would I
don't know you'd probably sign up for
you know do a lingo you'd find an app or
something or a course and you'd then
practice and practice and you'd be able
to make progress because you actually
learn something new and so I just think
big picture like parents are they're so
underere equipped and set up to feel and
this is I think has to do with shame
that when my kids are struggling or when
I'm yelling a lot it means something is
wrong with me or something is wrong with
my kid
I feel like these days in almost every
area if a CEO is saying I feel like I'm
struggling is it my fault or my
employees fault they probably say I
don't know who there's probably people
around who can help me who can teach me
why why do I keep yelling right and same
thing with almost every other field and
to me more than like if there's any
Legacy I get to leave in this world it's
not even the approach itself even though
I think our approach to Parenting is
very different um I I just want parents
to know like there is no shame in
investing in learning and growing um in
parenting and to look at that like they
probably look at every other area of
their life I assure you that your legacy
extends uh far beyond that but includes
it as well you've had a tremendous
impact and continue to I mean it wasn't
long ago that um you know the power
dynamics of parent child relationships
were you know you do what I say and I'm
the parent you're the kid and like that
kind of thing and I grew up in a
different era I'm 49 now and I've been
wanting to I'm 49 now so that I can
actually say something with with having
had some experience when things were
truly very different they were just so
different yeah was like you took what
you got and you worked with it and you
know things are so different thanks to
um your part um in all of this and one
thing I I do want to return to because I
realize I took us off um off track with
it is this idea of um kids but perhaps
adults as well
feeling or thinking they feel someone
else's feelings taking that on yeah this
difference between uh real guilt and
gosh it's really hard to come up with a
word for it I at one moment I thought
well maybe it's faog guilt but no you're
not pretending you're actually feeling
something um which feels like guilt
smells like guilt tastes like guilt
someone said codependence I I I don't
know that much about that word but
something like that what's a um yeah
it's a it's a whole landscape exactly
it's a whole landscape but you know one
practice that I'm familiar with um that
I know exists in a a couple of different
Realms of let's call it modern
psychology uh tools is this idea of um
creating a frame separation so like
after you come together with somebody
say to like do therapy um or something
or you've had sort of an emotional um
bind or entanglement doesn't have to be
negative um that one way that you can uh
learn over time to differentiate their
needs and wants from your needs and
wants is this idea of in your head I
know it sounds kind of corny but there's
a neuroscientific basis for this at
least to my of in your head you say for
like if we had just done this like we
had some resonance around something
maybe an argument okay like Dr Becky and
I got into a fight that in order to
really be able to move away from that
and and see it clearly how much of that
was yours how much of that was mine
there's this idea that you you tell
yourself okay what are five ways in
which you and I are clearly distinct
entities so you say and I know this
folks might chuckle at this but you say
like okay I'm a man you're a woman I
live in California you Dr Becky lives in
New York mhm um you could even make it
like first person you say like or third
person rather you could say I Andrew
hberman I'm wearing you know a black
shirt and a black um overshirt and Dr
Becky is wearing black and white okay so
some people might think like what's the
use of that but to me as a
neuroscientist whoever came up with that
and it wasn't me is nothing short of
brilliant because the brain organizes
emotions in these broader schemas of
physical objects and physical distance
and distance in time and that's the way
that we can differentiate between
ourselves and everything around us and
there's a whole discussion to be had
about this but so it's something that um
I've been playing with a little bit um
because I don't claim to be this Ultra
empath um or anything but I think
uh it's um clear that sometimes we take
in our thoughts and feelings about what
other people are feeling sometimes
accurate sometimes not and it can become
very difficult whether or not someone's
a one of these um I guess you call it
deeply feeling deeply feeling deeply
feeling kids um or not I mean anytime
you get into an emotional resonance good
or bad yeah I think it's uh we're porous
we're porous and that's part of what
makes humans so beautiful but yeah I
found that practice to be very useful
even if it's just in my own head like
they're over there and I'm over here but
not even necessarily pushing off them
but thinking like oh like I'm me and
you're you and there are a bunch of ways
in which we differ in time and space and
you and I I think the nervous
system comes to understand that as a
felt thing as opposed to just a
statement like hey like you own your
emotions all own mine that's just a
statement um is this any of this I've
never heard of that but I love that and
and it it is in parallel I think with so
many of the things I teach parents so
even the idea of locating someone to me
like my version of people in my life
that I know and love even if I don't
agree with anything they say that I can
locate they're like an egg with a a
shell they have a shell there's like a
there's a boundary we're really talking
about boundaries we all have different
levels of porousness to the external
world and I think if you know and
there's there's pros and cons of both
like I really mean this I am not
terribly porous to other people's
experiences I really have solid
boundaries there are definitely moments
in my closest relationships because what
people will say to me okay like I know
these are my feelings and not yours like
we're in a close relationship like can
you be here a little bit more with me
and that is true like that is what I
want to do right and sometimes it can be
a little distancing right and a little
separate people on the other end of that
Spectrum if they know I'm very porous I
tend to to me one of the ways of also
thinking about it I think i gaze in
before i gaze out and I think a lot of
people gaze out before they gaze in
right they spend a lot of time in other
people's brains and less time in their
own right what do they think of me what
do they think right um if that's what's
going on for you then the shell to your
egg isn't always intact and so there's a
spill over it's like whose feelings are
whose's whose thoughts are who's I'm
spending so much time worried about what
that person thinks of me I almost like
what am I what do I what do I think
right and so the exercise you're naming
is actually just a resetting of a
boundary right is and things that are
absurdly concrete are necessary for the
most Primal parts of our brain to
actually understand my name is Becky
Kennedy to me what I say I don't usually
say that I'll say my feet are on the
ground when I do a grounding exercise
everyone in our community knows this I
my hand is always on my heart I think
there's some amount of having contact
with your body my hand is on my heart
sometimes I used to do this with clients
especially after an emotional experience
going like this
name five things in the room is probably
another way there's a red clock I'm
wearing a white shirt they're very very
very basic as a way of kind of coming
back into your body two mantras that I
find help parents a lot actually make me
think about this exercise one is I am
the pilot not the
turbulence in our kids turbulent moments
when they are that
turbulence what so easily happens is we
merge into that with
them and then it's no wonder our kids
can't calm down our episodes last
forever cuz we're just turbulence and
turbulence together right so I'm the
pilot not the turbulence also one day
I'm going to do a partnership with
some some airplane company because I
feel like airplanes are just so
beautiful because the the pilot gets a
cockpit they get a boundary like it's
right that's what parents need so that's
one and the other one when your kids are
upset or after there's an argument some
people get very disregulated just
knowing someone's upset with them right
which is again kind of whose feelings
are whose I find one of the most
effective mantras and again these sound
cheesy it's just I'm
safe this isn't an
emergency I can cope with this because
our body if you tend to be porous you
get
activated just by other people being
activated even though it wasn't your
feeling in the first place and your body
actually needs the reminder that you're
safe
to not kind of add add to that
turbulence I love
it can we talk about projection for a
second one of the things that drives me
insane people close to me know this
because of this issue of porousness
versus
non-porous is when people tell me how I
feel and so I've talked to a few very
qualified psychiatrists about this and
it's called projection like you
sometimes it's if in Anger it's aacu
ative projection like you think I'm
crazy someone will say like you think
I'm crazy or um you're upset with me or
something like that I feel like
projection is um one of the kind of um
litmus tests of how porous we are
because in theory somebody should be
able to tell us that we feel whatever
and if we first look inside and by the
way I love this concept of do you first
look inside or outside do you listen to
what's inside or outside first when
something kind of AR Rises and
emotionally outs emotionally outside you
love love love that it's a something
I'll have to explore
um but if we don't do that then you
could see how projection would be very
effective and I'm not accusing anyone of
using this in any kind of diabolical way
I think people just do it because it
worked and they're doing it because
they've always done it but if somebody
says you know like like you don't care
about me as a friend or you know telling
someone how they feel is so very
different than telling someone how we
feel duh right it's kind of obvious and
yet once you start watching for
projection you see it all the time yeah
not just at you but like in between
people right like you know like I know
this stresses you out but you know
people start doing it all the time it's
very interesting to see how people kind
of divide into a couple different groups
on this maybe two or more groups in
terms of whether or not it affects them
and if it gets in their head or somehow
they're like no it's ridiculous I don't
I don't feel that way and for me it's
very context specific
but i' love your thoughts on um
projection both towards kids and from
kids so all right I'm going to I'm going
to respond to that and you just cut me
off if you're like Becky that's not the
direction I want you to go in because I
guess MGI which is I call most generous
interpretation is to me the like
embodiment of not what I do all the time
definitely not because I'm imperfect but
what I think is just a useful framework
to try to employ as much as possible
because the idea of what is the most
generous interpretation of someone's
Behavior like projection counteracts are
very natural human tendency which is
just what is the least generous
interpretation right we all come up with
the least generous interpretation of
people's behavior all the time and it's
just quick it's easy and I think it's CU
in our brain if we see something bad or
annoying it's just easy to think that
that's the whole right so I can't even
tell you how many times every parent I
know will say my kid doesn't listen they
hit all the elevator buttons they hit
other people and and then I said and I
know what you're thinking they're a
sociopath they're like that's literally
what I'm thinking I was like I know I
have that thought too well no when I was
a kid I used to push every button in the
elevator right does that mean I'm a
sociopath no it means you are a good kid
who has not yet learned the skills to
regulate urges that's all it means that
would be the most generous in you just
want no I'm kidding you just want to
push them I'm joking I'm joking I have a
kid like that too he wants things for
himself and he derives a lot of Joy from
things those types of kids are going to
do things okay that's my resilient Rebel
um okay but projection why am I bringing
that up so what's my most generous
interpretation of why this projection
would happen why would a kid say you're
mad at me or you know I can see how mad
you are at me or why would someone even
say in adulthood um you seem really
really stressed out right again the
gazing in versus gazing out I think it
comes back to in our childhoods I mean
that's what often a lot comes back
to were we taught that we have an
emotional life that lives inside of us
then were we taught how to understand
that emotional life then were we taught
how to manage and cope with that whole
emotional life most people were not so
it becomes this very very complicated
conundrum the emotional life is
happening inside me again like you can't
beat it it's happening our feelings
can't get rid of them and they're very
powerful they're Sensations but if your
framework is was always you're getting
punished you're getting ridiculed you're
being a baby then you you develop a very
conflictual relationship with your
feelings like I they can't be real they
almost can't be mine that's really they
can't be
mine people like this often blame other
people a lot for things they never did
when they're really frustrated and upset
cuz it's almost like this can't be mine
so like who did this feeling to me you
know there's in the world a lot of that
in the world who did this feeling to me
who put this in me right um it's it's so
fragile and so sad almost um and and so
you know toxic um but projection in a
way is the only way that I can
understand my emotional life is by
imagining you having an emotional life I
don't know like a a lot of these things
I hear myself say this I I like Mell I
was like oh that's what a vulnerable way
to go about the world what an awful way
to live in your body that you're so
overwhelmed and almost
um so self-
abandoning of the information in your
body that it must be someone else's you
know so that's so that's what projection
is right so what do we do when we see it
right um I don't know what's an example
right like you're so stressed out you've
been so stressed and you're thinking
maybe you're thinking a partnership like
I feel like you're you're the one who
stressed right never helps In the Heat
of a moment to be right I I've tried it
a million times I don't know about you
to be right in an AR be right to be
right in a heated moment when you're
like I'm going to be right not if you
want an effect effective outcome no no
but it's a very hard urge to resist it
took me many years to learn but someone
taught it to me in one
hour uh I feel very grateful that that
she taught me this that she didn't tell
me to do it but I just realized if you
just like I don't have any word other
than just like soften yes if you just
kind of like
um imagine becoming more like a noodle
than a like a rigid bar of iron I just
like and I actually I I think of um the
way that like my he always comes up but
my this Bulldog Mastiff Costello was
like super lazy the contract with him
was he would protect me with his entire
life but if my life wasn't on the line
Noodle and I remember just thinking like
if I just go there yeah then the basic
contract of like I care about you I'll
protect you with my life is still there
so I guess I learned it from my Bulldog
but it sort of played out in a in a
romantic relationship and it was just
really beautiful it was one of the best
things I learned um that from the two of
them yeah um is that I just like
literally like physically soft often
then like everything becomes apparent
somehow for me it allows me to get back
into my own eggshell y but still have
Optics out now that's me I realize it's
it you know and that doesn't mean in the
In the Heat of the Moment I'm not like
feeling like I want to be reactive right
but for me a physical change to my body
self-directed physical change to my body
is what just kind of like changed
everything yeah and and I think you know
this is so true in relationships
definitely at work and definitely in
parenting is
you don't have to represent everything
you believe in like a given moment like
we're not so fragile like to be like no
and you're projecting like I have time
like I this is this is a heated moment I
can kind of chill out you're so stressed
and I think I'm not I think there's
projection I might say like oh I
am who cares just like get through the
moment right and then maybe after if it
feels important I say feel like this
thing happens sometimes where when
you're stressed you say I'm stressed I
don't know like like let's talk about
this that that's when that happens I
think this is really true with kids too
right has happened the other day and in
some ways it's the same strategy which I
jokingly on Instagram called do nothing
with the capital D and a capital N
because so many times in hard situations
especially when you're accused of
something that's not true people will
say to parents oh so you're just going
to do nothing well I'm like take away
the just like doing nothing nothing in a
heated moment is a very sophisticated
technique because really what you're
saying is you're doing nothing on the
outside and you're being a adult and
managing your feelings on the inside
Amen to that versus doing nothing on the
inside and just yelling or reacting on
the outside so the other day my son came
to me before school my youngest and he
goes my sweatshirt's still dirty and I
was like oh man he go you promised me
you would wash my sweatshirt before
coool between us he never he never asked
me that okay and here's my fork in the
road it's like we all know what it would
be easier and what I by by the way I
wanted to say back to him 99% of me was
about to go you never asked me and then
he said I did no you didn't and now
you're lying to me and all of a sudden
it's like okay you know what he was
saying to me I wish my sweatshirt was
clean that's what he was saying that's
what we're all saying and I'm so upset
about it the feeling is so big that it's
like too overwhelming in this moment as
a 7-year-old to be mine so like I kind
of have to make it your fault to try to
make sense of it so what did I do in the
moment I literally did nothing what I
you promised me you watch my sweatshirt
and I went like
this I kind of was just like looking at
him like I knew what it was like to want
something and not be able to have it
and he's like you did in the moment I go
I
did that sweatshirt is dirty he really
wanted it to be clean just kind of he's
like I really did I was like that's the
worst not joking then he at the End by
five minutes later I didn't say anything
he got another sweatshirt we moved on I
didn't say I wasn't going to like ruin
the moment by being like see you could
cope or you never asked me but I think
in both these moment
whether someone saying you're stressed
or my kids accusing me I think about
this a lot in parenting I don't have to
prove my parenting in a moment I don't
have to prove it to my kid I don't have
to prove it cuz my mother-in-law is
watching like I trust myself way more
than I trust one single moment to
represent everything about me and I
think when we can gain a little bit of
that confidence we have a lot more
freedom to just be
effective and to also know there's a
moment moment to do nothing and then if
something's a chronic issue if my son's
chronically blaming me when things are
less heated I'm going to say to him you
know something in you know a calm moment
there super important and novel
approaches to things that I think um
everybody deals with um kids in the
picture or not I um my audience
sometimes gets angry with me when I um
ask very long extended questions but um
could I just share with you something
learned uh about an experiment because I
thinke um it blew my mind it won't take
long um there's a Imaging experiment so
you put people in a scanner they image
their brain see which areas are active
fmri there's a really wild experiment
where they bring people in for the scan
they don't tell them why they're there
and they tell them they're going to be
paid $30 and they set out um three $10
bills maybe you know this experiment I
don't know and then they go into the
scanner and then um they come out and
then the researcher leaves and there's a
discussion etc etc and um at some point
one of the $10 bills is removed by the
by the researcher and people are told at
the end of the experiment um you took
one of the $10 bills and they're like no
I didn't because they didn't nobody says
you're right
but then they reimage them and they
compare that to a condition in other
subjects where people actually did a
little sneaky steal during a money game
and the same areas of the brain light up
that we think are associated with guilt
in other words if somebody is told that
they did something even if they know
they didn't there are aspects of brain
circuitry that reflect a quote unquote
feeling of guilt it's like it introduces
this question about reality and so they
can know with 100% certainty you can
know with 100% certainty that you did
not do something and yet it starts to
introduce these questions about how you
gauge reality simply because somebody
you just met a few minutes earlier yes
in a position of authority they're the
researcher you're the subject Etc told
you that you did it I think this has
huge implications for parent child
relationships for romantic relationships
workplace relationships for um real bias
in the outside world you can imagine if
you're told your whole life that like
you're a piece of garbage or that you're
part of a bad group or something like
this like I'm not trying to get
political here like you could come to
believe that at a level that is
biological even if cognitively doesn't
make sense so this is where I think
about this like challenging um boundary
between knowing what we know being a
container staying in our frame you know
pick your favorite lingo around this and
the fact that words and the emotions of
other people really do um have the
capacity to rewire us on the inside you
know a question I'd have about that
study I'd be really curious if there was
variation among subjects where some
people that guilt part lit up a lot more
okay so you reminded me so so this is
the wild part okay the distribution of
kind of like uh people who have this by
the way folks there aren't single brain
areas for whole emotions but let's just
for sake of Simplicity here that have
the guilt area activated even when they
didn't take the money yes the entire
population of subjects doesn't
experience that to the same degree you
have these people who for whom it's very
high amplitude response and others who
aren't now I don't recall and I need to
go back and look at the study if it
divided according to male female because
earlier you said that this tendency um I
would bet a million dollars that if I
got to know those people the people who
really light up have a lot of focus on
gazing out and determining their inner
Reality by what other people think about
them and the people who did not light up
as much are the people who gaze in and
have a deep sense of themselves even in
the face of kind of a lack of validation
or even in the face of criticism I would
bet my money on that psychological kind
of is that a moderator or a mediator I
don't know you would tell me so I'd be
very curious about that great well I
have no skin in the game like I didn't
run this study and I'll go back and
check it out it's a collection of
studies and I hadn't known about this I
mean I read the Neuroscience literature
but I hadn't known about this I find it
like a complete yes of course on the one
hand and also super surprising on the
other and just oh so cool yeah um in the
sense that it's informative and it's
making me think that some people really
need to do the work of paying more
attention to other people's emotions and
feeling them a little bit more and other
people probably need to do the exact
opposite that's exactly right and to me
like I always I say this people I manage
I said like I think about this in
general with adults like I think such a
empowering thing as an adult is just to
know where you are in any given scale so
for me as a leader I'm always gas I'm
like go go go we can do this we can get
this accomplished I'm probably like
pretty far in that and given that I know
it's really important for me to have
people around me who sometimes say like
whoa let's look at this first right um I
also know that sometimes if I do have a
like maybe I should slow this down I
should like really listen to that cuz
that's like not right but knowing where
I am on a scale is important I I I talk
about someone in that I manage who she
really needs to be more direct with the
people she manages just like you know
like sometimes ask questions when she
really wants statements and can have a
little higher standard and I think it's
it's helpful to know where she is in
that scale because remember saying like
I want you to go as far as you can
toward the other direction without being
disrespectful because it's almost
impossible to do that right and so I
think for adults to know let's say i
gaze in or I more gaze out neither is
better or Worse probably again mental
health and resilience is about having
just a lack of rigidity and so to say
what is my starting point like anyone
listening what is my starting point
there's no morality it's literally not
better or worse it just gives me
information about which direction to
experiment with and I like to make this
a concrete experiment right so let's say
you are someone who tends to gaze out
before you gaze in and you're always
like I can't do this thing I want to do
because it would incon someone I told
this story the other day on my Instagram
and people went bananas about it I was
at the airport and I got a cup of coffee
in the morning um and I like my coffee
with just like a really little bit of
milk right and and I I know to specify
it if I'm asking someone else so I went
to the counter and I said hey can I get
a medium coffee not black just a little
little bit of milk pretty close to Black
sure no problem I go I wait in the line
then it's on the counter I pick it up
Becky and it's like light as can be
I got back online I brought the coffee
and I said hey h i' asked for this I
know there's a lot of people probably
got lost could you asked for this you
know darker could you pour out a good
amount of this and then refill it with
coffee the person you know who knows if
it could have gone differently different
day should oh right no problem here you
go this happens with things that are so
much bigger than coffee but the coffee
example is such a good one because what
I'm doing in that moment is I'm saying
I'm allowed to have my coffee the way I
wanted it and asked for it even if it's
awkward or inconveniences the other
person now can people be on the opposite
extreme and can someone hear this and be
like I probably need to do a little bit
less of my own needs that's what I'm
saying you have to know where you are
but what I have found at least with
moms is the idea of O you know I asked
for milk and this is whole milk or I
always I used to give my clients this
experiment who had this struggle I said
I want you at the grocery
store after basically done checking out
to say oh you know what I actually don't
need those paper towels I can't even
tell you people are like I can't do that
I can't like return it like oh my
goodness it like a panic attack and the
Panic the Panic feeling is that would be
a completely new circuit that would be
me saying I'm willing to do something to
meet my own needs I actually don't need
that paper
towel even though it could get an iral
or inconvenience temporarily someone
else those little experiments and it
might be the opposite it might be saying
to my partner tonight you know what we
always sit down and talk about my work
and I actually did have a stressful day
but you know
what I want to hear about your day you
go first that that's also an experiment
and for someone who's on that extreme
they're going to also have a panic
attack they're going to be like this is
deeply uncomfortable but just knowing
where you are in the Spectrum gives you
the information you need to get a little
bit of balance yeah I think there's
clearly a distribution and um whether or
not it's too whether not it's a binary
distribution or it's kind of like a
normal distribution I I don't know but
there's clearly variance here from one
person to the next and probably even
depending on how well rested we are and
all the rest but I do think that we do
kind of fall into phenotypes of yeah
prone to um reacting to other people's
emotions without hearing and listening
to and responding to ours first like
truly ours first versus people who are
just really out there I I realized it's
very different than any other kind of
relationship but when I first went from
being a postto to having my own
laboratory the chair in my department my
chairman in one department anyway he
said you know you should get a great big
desk that's like really thick I was like
yeah like why I mean I get it you don't
want to be sitting like right next to
your employees or something but like why
so that and he goes so that when they
cry you won't feel like you need to cry
or take care of them you'll just slide
the kleenex across the desk and I was
like are you kidding he was like no and
then
uh years later um I looked back and I
realized I understood what he was saying
I mean he didn't know me at all but he
was just saying probably something about
himself which is people are going to
come into your office they're going to
cry it does happen and you're going to
need need to be the boss which is to be
supportive and empathic but like you
can't get pulled into it because they
might be crying about something they
don't like about the lab or about
something not happening the way they
want it I mean who could imagine any
other reason to cry in your your boss's
office but maybe they have a family
issue and you know you have to remember
you're the boss and I thought oh that's
interesting I ended up with a dust that
was kind of medium in in in width but I
think that nowadays there's a lot more
um kind of bleeding of Ro
and um you know it used to be that
everyone got really dressed up for work
now dressing down is like common in
certain circumstances and not others I
think that there's a lot of um kind of
lack of clarity
about here we go again you know power
and authority and and but also kind of
staying in our own frame versus taking
on someone else's frame yeah um you know
I have a friend who runs a pretty large
business and he did the same experiment
that you did of asking people um you
know how he could do better but first he
unfortunately made the mistake of asking
people how they felt about being there
and they ended up with making one of
these emotion clouds where they took
everyone filled out a thing and wrote
what the most dominant emotions were and
then he told this story like call me
late at night he sits down and they're
going to present this as data in front
of everybody and this emotion Cloud
comes up and the biggest bubble in the
middle just says
stress and he was mortified right but he
learned that they all feel really really
really stressed that sort of exercise
would never have happened 10 15 years
ago yeah it's like yeah like I won't say
what profession he's in for sake of
privacy but like it's a profession where
stress is part of the process and you
don't kind of get the certificate at the
end so to speak if you don't experience
stress but this actually relates to what
we started with in a way I'm going to
circle it back there which is and CU I
hear this a lot you know H kind of some
kids these days they they don't they
don't know how to tolerate stress or
they're always overwhelmed but part of
it is again maybe this is my MGI maybe
they haven't been told the right story
about stress or anxiety it this came up
with my kids the other day my older son
had his first basketball game um of the
season and he goes oh I'm really nervous
feeling a little anxious and it's just
so interesting like the way we respond
we respond in little ways to our kids in
these moments form like the way they and
end up thinking about those feelings
later on I said well of course you're
nervous n being nervous means you care
you really care about basketball right
and obviously we've had many
conversations about What feelings mean
but it was so interesting I watched him
go yeah yeah I do care kind of in that
little sentence being nervous means you
care I mean think about it you're never
nervous about anything you don't care
about right if being nervous means I
care I have a story to understand it I
now inherently feel like the feeling is
normal I'm almost I'm almost like proud
you know like yeah I do care right my
relationship with that feeling is going
to be so different than if my parents
like why are you nervous there's nothing
to be nervous about or oh you're nervous
oh does that mean you're not going to
play well oh my goodness are you're
going to miss your foul shots like I
mean so in the first right my kid feels
like being nervous is wrong so I just
set them up to feel like they're feeling
the wrong feeling when they're feeling
nervous going on and the second I'm
layering on my anxiety to their
nervousness not a great combo but the
stories we tell matter so in the
workplace you're stressed yeah you know
actually this makes me think maybe not
right now when more time it'll be really
helpful to talk about what what is
stress why do we feel stress how do we
talk to ourselves when we feel stressed
does anyone here know the way you talk
to yourself when you're stressed has the
power to make stress feel a little
smaller or a little bigger that's really
interesting I wonder do anyone here use
a session should we do something in the
workplace about how to deal with stress
because you're
right this is a stressful job and and
this is where I don't think about power
but Authority and I want to own that and
let you know that stress comes along
with this type of job I'm making this up
and this is why you get paid pretty well
and this is why you know whatever else
could be true but one of my jobs is not
just being honest but actually helping
everyone develop the best skills that
maybe no one ever taught them before to
manage stress let me know if that's of
Interest I just think about that like
the whole mood just changed you kind of
own your Authority and you own the story
and I think whether you're talking about
being a CEO or being a parent it's
actually all the same that makes sense I
have a rule which is if my pulse rate
goes above a certain limit I my thumbs
stop working meaning I won't allow
myself to text I don't I don't talk on
the phone I'll just I'll go in the
bathroom and just sit for a second if I
have to but that's rare typically I just
I'm like I have a rule my heart rate
goes up my thumbs don't work what do you
do I just do nothing I follow the do
nothing thing I just wait I mean I I
also have a rule which is unless
somebody's hemorrhaging right in front
of me um it usually can wait drives
people crazy but they thank me later
like unless somebody's literally
hemorrhaging like I can pause my
response um because I'm going kind of
like move fast get things done kind a
person and actually it was taught to me
by a chairman of a major university in
your home city of New York City he said
um there's always more time and I said
that's ridiculous he said unless
somebody's hemorrhaging right in front
of you there's always more time going
back to my daughter it's it's one of the
mantras that's been really helpful for
me as someone who again just knowing
myself I always like to go go go I get
so much pleasure probably identity value
from doing things and so a byproduct of
that is I always kind of feel like I'm
in a rush because my body craves
movement and checking things off but
being in a rush is never terribly
helpful in close relationships no one
likes to feel like come on you get to
the end of the story or you it's not
good so sometimes I think efficiency and
relationship building are like
antithetical I amen a thousand times
over no I I don't think we can be
efficient in relationships it it's like
efficiency and other things is beautiful
um well it's a unitary experience being
efficient in relation and so like when I
can be in efficiency a lot mode a lot
and it's something that I have to really
think when I'm going home to my closest
relationships and it's interesting now
that I work so much more than I used to
it's almost reinforcing the efficiency
mode so I I really know I to you know my
own therapy like really work on like
that's not a value of mine all the time
at work maybe sometimes even there
sometimes you got to get out of it to
connect to people right and so that is
something again where like knowing where
I am on that
scale asking people to call me out oh
Mom you're rushing me at night Becky I
want to tell you the whole story I'm not
just trying to give you the tldr I want
the experience of telling you the story
I'm like right I'm doing that thing yeah
slowing down is rarely a mistake I guess
I guess occasionally but uh rarely a
mistake it's really true I'd like to
talk a little bit about technology I
know this is a a growing interest of
yours i' I've been thinking a little bit
um based on our earlier discussion about
s of people who are in their own
container or or sensing what's going on
inside them prior to paying attention to
and sensing what's going on in other
people because clearly both are
important I don't like this idea that
it's like one or the
other but with the Advent of text
messaging so here I'm not going to talk
about social media this is not about
social media uh with text messaging is
this first of all this is the first time
in human evolution that humans have
written with their thumbs um that's
weird um been kind of quirky uh
reflection but the other one is this is
the first time in human evolution
meaning very recently that we are aware
of what's going on with so many other
people and we expected to at least know
it and perhaps even respond to it I mean
if you it's just I know people younger
than 30 are probably going wait no it's
always been this way but it wasn't
always this way clearly our brain has
adapted to this new format but it did
not evolve in this format whereby you're
getting on a plane and you look at your
phone and you are aware of the movements
and requests and um maybe kind
statements Etc from other people we're
tethered in so many ways and that means
that our brain is really Tethered to the
states of others their emotional states
their physical states where they are you
said and I'll keep repeating it because
I love it so much the more you can
locate somebody uh the more it reflects
their values so being able to locate
somebody in space and time and
understand how bounded they are or not
to their own emotions or yours fantastic
but the fact that you have 10 people in
your phone that are that you're aware of
you're not even supposed to be aware of
10 people at once except the 10 people
perhaps around you on the you know
boarding a plane yeah um so we're being
forced to navigate a new landcape with
all this yes um after this conversation
folds we'll look at our
phones you couldn't have that many I
guarantee one thing no matter how many
text messages or few text messages you
have it's far more conversations if if
you will than you could possibly have by
phone at once yep so in the old days you
left messages and you'd get on the phone
when you could not saying we go back to
that but I think we might be asking
ourselves to do something that is
impossibly hard and maybe
even bad for us yeah I don't know how
um apocalyptic you want me to get about
this um but I think I actually you know
my husband and I were talking about
phones and
text and social media and AI um and I
brought up something to him he's like I
don't think I in all the arguments I've
heard I haven't heard that
where I feel like we're changing in a
dramatic way um our basic evolutionary
drive around
attachment in a way where attachment has
always been the primary evolutionary
Drive of humans and with all the
different technological shifts there
have been cuz people say oh there's been
this there been this what's never been
shifted is kind of the nature really of
onetoone human
attachment we're entering into something
really new where let's even say text
messages 20 at once 10 at
once our bodies like will always crave
what's immediately gratifying over what
is longterm good for us it's just it's
and I the way another way I think about
it is our bodies will always choose
convenience and ease and gratification
over what's good for us long term so you
they about all these pings coming in
it's a lot of information this text that
text this text this text and what you're
doing in your circuitry and over time
evolutionarily is getting used to the
multiplicity of relationships the
multiplicity of information it's just
more gratifying than oneon-one to the
point that one-on-one conversation over
text or even in
person is going to have so much more of
a gap than it ever has been in terms of
how
slow how low stem and how boring and
awkward it is compared to especially for
kids who get this early the constant
information flow and gratification and
stimulation I think that's going to have
a profound impact not right away but
over time then if you add in social
media and then if you add in AI I mean
on the way humans just are even able to
relate to each other so yes I think like
this advancement in technology and
what's happening I think there's always
been a trade-off always between how
short-term gratifying something is and
how long-term good something is for us
because the things that are really good
for humans longterm are the things that
involve humans to tolerate frustration I
would say that is the most important
skill I think for kids to learn but the
world more than
ever it is built now with insanely low
frustration tolerance cuz we're bu for
so much information so much consumption
and so much media gratification this is
actually I think the thing that isn't
talked about with technology it's why
parenting has changed it's why so much
of parenting is about making kids happy
and their lives easy because there's
never been a generation of parents like
my generation where our lives are just
so much easier we have so much less
tolerance for our kids Tantrums because
we're on our phones wanting our life to
be easier so we stop the Tantrum we make
their life easier we make them anxious
we make them fragile because of our
lowered frustration tolerance so I don't
know where we're Landing here but and by
the way I text like I'm not like a
purist here you know I I'm a realist I
live in the world you know um but I I
think it's profound how it's changing
human interaction and expectations and
gratification and my colleague Anna lmy
who wrote dopamine Nation right cited
some data that uh humans have more free
time now across socioeconomic groups
more free time for everybody than ever
before more expectation of immediate
gratification and it's not just the text
that we're getting it's um for some
people the text that they're not getting
they're thinking about the people that
they haven't heard back from Etc I mean
like you the number of tethers right
exactly like the number the number of
tethers is just um is just astonishing
um I had a conversation with somebody
recently that popped to mind where it
was a little bit it was like a low
friction one that ended in a really good
place where I said you know the problem
is you know what I was talking about
there's a little bit of an age Gap and I
said you know the problem is you think
slow is low like what I was saying was I
like to just chill this is something I
haven't done enough of in my life
because I'm pretty ambitious person and
always have been since I was little um
about everything but I've learned that
like slow isn't low like I love just
like sitting down and like hanging out
with the dog or just it's like slowing
down and it used to feel like slow was
low it used to feel like oh nothing's
happening or this is depressing or it's
boring and I think in recent years that
became more and more the case as I got
more and more pulled into technology and
then I did a little bit of a technology
distancing experiment if you will I have
this wooden box that someone made for me
and I put my phones in there and it's so
amazing how once you put the phone in a
different container it like completely
changes the relationship to it I don't
get it but any anyway again physical
barriers to make to take emotional steps
always a good idea
um and I just realized like slow isn't
low like slow is awesome so I totally
agree that the circuits of our brain
have now adapted to expect immediate
gratification I like to think and maybe
this is a um a false um wish but I like
to think that there are components of
our brain that are hardwired enough
through tens or hundreds of thousands of
years of evolution that
might be able to recognize and
appreciate the slow moments and not feel
like slow is low meaning slow is
depressing um but I do think that if one
is weaned in uh raised in an environment
where you expect things quickly well
then you know it's going to feel like
the horse and cart compared to the car
at some level I do agree and I think for
parents who have you young kids I think
these are such powerful and empowering
things to think about when your kids are
young because I think it's easy to think
well okay so I'll deal with this when my
kid gets a
phone it's the circuits surround even
how your kid will use the phone how much
you're going to be able to set
boundaries with your kid when they get a
phone all these have to do with the
patterns early on right so if we go back
to
slow is good frustration and frustration
tolerance is the name of the
game it requires a lot of inconvenient
moments that matter so so much for how
not only your kid learns to tolerate the
frustration inherent in life but I think
this is really important how your kid
learns to feel capable kids only develop
capability from watching themselves get
through hard things they don't develop
capability by being successful ever in
some ways it builds up this pressure and
a fragility if that's been the only
thing they have and when we think about
this whole generation who's so anxious
kind of so fragile I really believe the
antidote to anxiety is
capability and we I'll give an example
like we steal our kids capability all
the time when they're young in the name
of short-term convenience for everyone
so here's an example like my I remember
this day my oldest who's now 13 was like
three and he was really into puzzles
when he was three puzzles are like
really hard right he was working on it
something like I can't do it you know
the classic wine which I just want
everyone to know like no part of me is
like I love that sound no like nobody
likes whining
okay but to me those are our like bang
for our buck moments you know they're
not our easy moments they're our bang
for our buck my kid is going to learn
something about how to deal with
situations they don't think they're
capable of completing that is such an
important lesson and I have a fork in
the road I can I can either do the
puzzle for him which gives me short-term
convenience stops the Meltdown
but beyond frustration tolerance like
one of the things I really remember
thinking when my my kid was young is if
I do it for
him I'm stealing his
capability because if he can get through
this and kind of get to the point where
he says I did a puzzle I didn't think I
could do that's incredible so I I I
remember this cuz it's it it felt so
he's still whine but there are these
moments as a parent and this is what
like to help parents with our wins are
not based on our kids' reactions our
wins happen when you just know there's
this amazing feeling you have of a
parent I know that was important I know
it and I remember saying to him with
this puzzle
situation sweetie I'm not going to do
the puzzle for you and I I want to tell
you
why the feeling you get when you think
you can't do something kind of take a
deep breath maybe take a break maybe
even the next day watch yourself do that
that thing is literally the best feeling
in the world it is the best feeling it
becomes addictive and I will not take
that feeling away from you because I
believe you're going to get it I could
cry like and one of the things I I feel
like people hear the story like okay
back great you know I do not do that all
the time sometimes I finish the puzzle
but when we think about what we want for
our kids later in life it might be no
I'm not getting you a phone yet how a
kid reacts to to that situation it's not
just about a phone it's kind of well
have you always just done the thing for
me have you always just given me what I
want do I have any ability to feel like
I can tolerate frustration and wait and
figure things out that all layers into
how kids react not getting a phone how
kids approach hard math problems how
kids do or do not sit down to start
their English essay that is difficult to
do and all that stuff you can start
building those skills in the teenage
years don't get me wrong but the the leg
up your kid has at 14 when they've been
basically building those life and
academic skills from the start and
they've built their identity around
capability like that's what I want to
give every parent and every kid in the
world yeah it's awesome you know I said
it last time we spoke I'll say it again
you know if you're if you're thinking of
adopting I'm I'm be happy to uh put
myself up for adoption it's such a
beautiful um philosophy and stance to
take around effort and frustration I
mean uh again this isn't about my life
but I feel so blessed that came up in
science where things take forever you
can work two years on a project and then
discover you do the right control
experiment and you like we got nothing
like like literally we have nothing yeah
um there wasn't and there still isn't a
tendency to publish what are called
negative results which aren't bad
results but where you basically got
nothing you can find a flaw and the the
reagents you're using you got nothing
you're starting again Y and to have that
so you know a few few times and to have
some papers take two three four years to
get accepted other papers 6 months I'll
tell you the six months feels really
short but these days we we get so much
immediate gratification yes the other
day I was staying at a hotel and um I
ordered food in I don't do it that often
I was like I really want like a poke
ball there's that Pokeball place I
ordered it was there in 11 minutes I was
like whoa like this is so wild I was
like I got to be careful not because
I'll overeat pokeballs you can only have
so many Pokeballs but it's like you just
it's there convenience it's so you know
it's it's incredible I remember and sad
and scary and exciting and and all the
things you know so I think having
variable um durations of effort reward
uh in one's life and being able to see
where like the latency is very short yes
social media but you know other things
that where you have longer duration
effort to reward um contingencies I'm
sounding kind of this like nerd speak
but I've gone on records before and I'll
say again that you know dopamine that is
achieved without effort preceding it is
just be really careful doesn't matter if
it's amphetamine cocaine social media or
anything else um you get used to the
schedule that's right and and I think we
need to be able to tolerate and enjoy
and lean into and Savor variable
schedules of effort and reward it's so
interesting to say that I have two
thoughts that number one when I think
about the puzzle situation that's like f
eort cuz effort effort effort struggle
deep breath effort effort nope that's
not it effort effort and then you get
the dopamine that circuit I just always
think that is such a benefit to my kid
later in life it's kind of the opposite
of you know which we all do sometimes
but if it's the only circuit being on
your iPad all the time as a little kid
and the no effort all the dopamine well
I think about it as a a friend used to
call it years ago birthday money there's
one time each year okay maybe because of
the holidays when you're supposed to get
presents just for being you it's called
your
birthday right or if you're a kid you
know or whatever holidays are where we
celebrate kids by giving um presents or
we celebrate each other but every other
day you're not supposed to get rewards
necessarily just because not just for
being you the the rewards are out there
in life and appreciating things I'm not
trying to be too stoic here but there's
only one day each year where you get
literally presence just for being you
the other stuff is supposed to require
effort yeah and struggle I think you
know it's really interesting my my
second um had a lot of speech issues
when she was younger and I kind of
noticed it like at a certain age you're
supposed to be building sounds and words
and she was replacing like as soon as
she had a new sound she lost one and
just had a sense something was going on
she had a pretty serious speech araxia
she had to go to speech therapy um 3
days a week right for probably a year
she now you wouldn't know but it was
interesting I remember at that time my
older one probably five maybe she was
two or three and six and I remember
someone saying to me like oh about my
daughter like oh poor her kind of you
know it's like a lot and and I don't
think I said this but it's so
interesting I remember thinking she's
way better off than my son if I'm going
to worry about one of my kids right now
which I'm not worried about either I'd
worry about my son his early years were
so linear so without struggle like she's
going to have an early experience of
struggling working hard she won't
remember it with her words but that
circuitry which are our important
Memories the ones we don't remember with
our words the ones that our bodies
remember she has such an early
experience with watching herself
struggle and get to the other side like
I would wish that for every child and so
I I also think I I want to also share
that story because I think parents who
have kids who have those early issues
it's so easy like oh I actually think
it's really empowering to do a complete
180 to be like wait I'm not going to fix
this right away I'm going to support my
child I'm going to let them know I
believe in them I'm going to let them
know I see a version of them that's
going to get through this they're going
to still struggle and that is actually
going to be like the best foundation and
almost like the best leg up yeah I have
a friend very very successful um who
told me that he wasn't until you know
until he was in his 40s that he had like
kind of a major um difficult life a
major business disappointment and it
almost crushed him like you know but he
had never had that before yeah he had
been so successful uccessful over and
over again you know it was fun for me to
talk to my dad recently on the podcast
because we haven't had a conversation
like that ever um and we were talking
about sort of mistakes that one makes
and um in the context of you know work
etc and he said still ringing in my ears
he said well you know those those
humiliations are actually good for us he
called them humiliations I was like
really I was like yeah you know they
they humble us and they keep us um
thoughtful about what we're doing next I
was like yeah but it was kind of wild to
hear that um I don't know why I need to
hear it externally because I know it's
true I knew it was true but yeah it's
not just making mistakes like sometimes
listen I'm fully against bullying where
I understand how that can be very
destructive but like there are going to
be times when we're going to feel
humiliated and to be able to bounce back
from that is pretty awesome I I actually
think that builds character strength I
do yeah and I think you know this is
like a a great lead into parenting I
hear this all the time where someone
will say I don't know if my kid's being
bullied but like they're you know they
were told you can't play basketball with
us you're the worst basketball player in
the grade something like that right
where the way I work with parents right
is again assuming this isn't chronic I
don't think Step One is calling the
school I don't think Step One is calling
the other parent right if you zoom out
you're right like I don't think a kid's
going to be called the water basball
player you know over and over in the
course of the next couple decades but
they will be called some something
they'll be left out or even if nothing
happens you know what's going to happen
they're going to feel less then in a
group like probably a million times I do
right still so we have this almost
opportunity of like okay well what
skills would be useful when my kid is 18
and 30 and actually the struggle again
is my opportunity I was think my kids
are in my home for 18 years I sounds
like sick and I don't know if I really
mean this but I'm going to say it like I
almost hope they have all the variations
of struggles they're going to have later
on cuz then at least I can kind of get
in it with them and like build some
skills and help them see that they can
manage and then I feel like those bumps
are going to happen right I I guess it
is like Pilots don't they when they have
simulations there's no way they simulate
perfect flights and say you're ready to
fly they simulate all the issues so that
a pilot can learn the right controls and
then they're really prepared they don't
take away the issues right no I I I love
the analogy of flying because I you know
I I'll never forget driving in really
thick fog for the first time this
happens if you grow grow up in the Bay
Area just being able to see one
reflector at a time and being terrified
now like driving in fog never feels
great but I've been there it's like it's
a familiar feeling and um yeah I've been
thinking a lot these days about um this
whole thing about proficiency and and uh
our our expectation of kids now noway
you know that we have been told for a
long time that we need to guard against
kids feeling terrible about themselves
on the other hand we want them to be
proficient and what you're really
talking about here if I understand
correctly is proficiency at Being Human
at being really good at certain things
less good at others I can also tell you
know any any kid because I was this kid
like in in a group of musicians I'm the
least proficient I mean you really just
don't talk about wanting someone to do
nothing I'm best off not even playing
the triangle okay like just doing
nothing would be the best thing I could
do to any musical effort it's just but I
realized that at some point even though
every kid in my school played an
instrument they had like the youth
Symphony and all that kind of stuff
because it was also a time when I could
just kind of relax like you don't have
to be certainly best at everything but I
also believe that in order to really
find what you're kind of quote unquote
meant for you have to try a bunch of
things and find out what you're never
going to even approach partially skilled
at you still have to try I guess that's
the point so on the one hand I guess I'm
saying do nothing on the other hand I'm
saying you still have to try I guess you
have to try to find out that you're
really as bad at music as I found out I
am maybe or I think we're also talking
I'm good with it I'm good with it I love
music but I don't need to play it but I
think then what you're saying is you're
able to separate your identity from any
Behavior being bad at music doesn't mean
you're a bad person and I think anyone
hears that they're like obviously but we
conflate those two things 90% of the
time right that's why we really care
about winning at Scrabble is like to
some degree we think it means we're
smart and everyone's like you know
versus I'm probably the same level of
smart whether I win at Scrabble or lose
at Scrabble right and to me that's what
confidence is it's not feeling like
you're the best at something it's
feeling like it's okay to be you when
you're not the best at something right
it's feeling at home with yourself and
to me feeling at home with yourself is
first of all it's an amazing internal
motivator because you get to also figure
out what you're really passionate about
right um and yeah learning to
participate in things and even have joy
in things that you're not great at again
these are things I think our kids really
can learn not from lessons not from a
textbook not really from a teacher they
learn it from what we model it's
actually interesting we play a ton of
board games in my family and I'm just I
think they're like the antidote to
everything on the screen so we have a
million board games I'm the resident if
anyone ever needs a recommendation
what's your your favorite board game to
play as a family okay I Love Sushi go
God don't know it but I'll check out go
party is the better version it's
actually a really great adult game too
it's very strategic we play code names
we play a lot of word games we Play
Boggle we play Ghost we play Scrabble um
we play rumy Q um but the game I was
going to say that we also play a lot of
that I love is categories okay so have
you ever played that yeah that's a fun
game I whatever part of the brain is
good at generating a lot of different
things from a single letter is must be
very small in my brain I am so bad at
categories I mean my kids are all pretty
quick I lose to everyone my my
seven-year-old included I'm horrible it
actually is a game I suggest often I'm
like let's play categories and I think
there like that's actually so powerful
for our kids I mean I think a lot of us
if we look back we think like is one of
the reasons my parents didn't really
play with me or do things is like they
felt like they weren't good at it you
know like probably right to demonstrate
to your kid I can choose something I can
have joy in something I can want to do
something that I'm not good at that is
again going to be more powerful to your
kid than sitting down and saying this is
what we think is going to help kids it's
okay to do things that you're not good
at you and I know that's like logical
words in the brain that's not an
experience they're building or
internalizing kids learn from stories
from
experiences and so I think that's one
way in terms of how do I help my kids be
confident but also just be at home with
themselves and do things are not best
stat probably the best way to do that is
to model it over and over to your kids I
love it we're back to uh Theory versus
practice yes I'm big on practice maybe
on both I feel like as long as there are
kids and adults that seem I want to
emphasize seem to do everything well you
know the athlete academic you know
musician uh Dan you know good dancer
like as long as you know Charming with
other people as as long as those people
exist or seem to
exist we're going to have to all
overcome our sense that you know we
should be at least partially good
at a wide variety of things maybe not
everything do you think those people
exist no I know they don't exist I I
know that there are people that
apparently are like that um they're
fakers well well I don't know you know I
will say that I you know and and this is
I don't get paid to say uh positive
things about the University I work for
um or not but the I will say
occasionally I'll um meet a student from
Stanford and I'm like goodness gracious
like these this kid right can apparently
do everything like they're an athlete
and they're a musician they have all
these things they they there are those
people and I will say um but this is
important the pressure that the
perception of those people creates on
them
without fail brings them to immense
challenge in their life if not then
later I've seen it every single time I
know because I grew up in the town where
I'm now a professor and I went to school
with many people who ended up there or
or you know other places like that and
of course there are people like that in
every environment they are outliers they
tend to be very Salient we tend to to
notice them and um they create this you
know false internal pressure this is the
reason I raise it it and I want to say
it's not like they eventually you know
fail and dissolve into a puddle of their
own Tears like hopefully they're
resilient and they push forward in life
and some of them do amazing things and
some of them do less amazing things but
the point is that there are people among
our species that seem to do many many
things very very well and I think when
we hold ourselves to that standard um we
uh we suffer and we hold ourselves back
I think that I believe I just have a
central belief that we all do have some
unique gifts that we're meant to bring
to our life and to the world and it
shows up in different forms and one of
the worst things we can do in trying to
find that and express it is trying to be
really good at everything uh I just
think that's the most poisonous idea in
the um American mindset that we're
supposed to be really good at everything
on the other hand I personally believe
that we should try a variety of things
so that we experience frustration and
fail and eventually find what it is that
is um you know we're quote unquote meant
to do I do um but I feel also very
fortunate that I was never really pushed
to be excellent at everything yeah I
have terrible hand eye coordination but
I'm pretty good at sports with my feet
but when I say pretty good I mean
passable yeah so I gave up on the idea
of becoming a professional athlete very
very young so I think we have to know
that we have to play games with our
hands and our feet in order to figure
that out yeah and I
guess you know we were talking about
this maybe before we started but I don't
know I'm trying to think why this is but
I tend I tend not to put anyone on a
pedestal m
I feel like and maybe part of it is in
part of my private practice for years I
saw maybe I saw the Stanford grads who
are then living in New York and they
weren't literally from Stanford but I
have all these late 20y olds and they're
pedigree like all look the same top of
their class ivy league Goldman Sachs
this
MBA and like so many of them had the
same
like insane anxiety and emptiness I I
still remember the way one of them
described how they felt and she was
brilliant with her words and she
said I walk around and it's like when
I'm with people and doing things and at
work it's like there's a ton of color
when I'm alone I feel like I am an empty
room with white walls oh goodness that's
very sad very sad very sad it actually
has a a happy ending which is really um
or has a Nuance ending but but happy
ending where
um
she feel like it's actually I was
actually saying this to a friend cuz I
actually relates my own childhood I feel
like I've you know grown a lot had my
therapy and I feel like when I was
younger I was really hard driving and
really like sowhat people pleasing and
me and my friend who are both like that
were like that have kids who aren't
really like that they and they're
they're amazing kids and they do so well
and they have this internal confidence
but sometimes we joke we're like but
there's nothing that will drive you like
feeling not good enough there's nothing
that drives you like feeling like every
test score defines your self worth and
it's so sick right because we're almost
like conflicted with our kids like they
they're they're all great kids they're
responsible but they they almost have a
little bit more inner contentment right
um but I think about that young woman I
saw and how at work she felt amazing
until didn't happen until she was 28 she
didn't get the promotion she thought she
was getting and then I mean she had
never failed before and it's not only
the never failure when your internal
sense of self is built outside in which
you actually can do if you have a lot of
accomplishments it works for a while but
as soon as that stops working if you
have nothing you feel like in an empty
room with white walls what's really
compelling about you know the therapy
over the course of number of years is I
is I still remember over covid we were
then then zooming and she had had her
own place um and she actually went
through this process and she she was
very artistic of of painting the walls
in her actual room talking about making
something concrete and like kind of in
the way that she was was feeling a lot
more lit up in inside out instead of
outside in it's great um but I just
think I guess I know myself too and
maybe maybe this is part of why I try
not to put people on a pedestal maybe
it's as I'm talking people are like oh
Becky gets it right with her kids and
she's doing this and like whatever I can
share like that that is that is part of
my story I also yell at my kids I also
feel like sometimes I'm on my phone too
much I feel like my life is out of
balance I don't get to see my friends
nearly the way I used to they probably
often are like Where's Becky why is she
not you know not only was Ling to text
but remembering my birthday or whatever
I forget and that doesn't feel good to
me because I used to do more of that and
so no one no one has it all figured out
like humans I think it's are remarkably
complicated remarkably imperfect we all
have parts of us that feel really good
and we maybe some of us play up those
parts more than others and we all have
parts of
us that that feel confusing maybe have
some
shame feel you know
I don't know just more complicated and
so at least want to get that out there
about myself oh I really appreciate you
sharing and I I want to be clear um if
if I was at all unclear that I I
certainly don't hold up these um uh
Ultra performers in all domains on a
pedestal I I think um they're in a very
precarious place inside and outside
they've essentially given up all their
power and agency to one incoming failure
and maybe they never experience it and
they get to the end without having know
but what what a terrible way to live
anyway I I've always looked up since I
was little too people that really um
took a unique path I've always found
that um they yes accomplish tremendous
things and and they have um interesting
sometimes painful flaws like I I'm a
huge fan of of the late neurologist and
writer Oliver Sachs very very incredible
man very complicated life you know if
you read his books his autobiography
which I highly recommend everybody um do
if you're interested in science um and
just animals and and a a a life uniquely
lived he's a really good example and
there a bunch of other examples that are
meaningful to me um certainly not
somebody who you know he couldn't do an
experiment to save his life he was um
moved out of multiple universities and
places you know a very very complicated
character had a methamphetamine
addiction um was a closet homosexual it
came out later in life and was then long
periods of time on his own and anyway
had a great relationship later in life
um very interesting um
person uh became that way and found his
Passion by realizing how terrible he was
at certain things including certain
branches of medicine so I think that
trying many things and being really
realistic about whether or not
something's for us or not but uh is the
key but then I guess the question
becomes and this must be so hard from
the perspective of parenting but also
just in terms of guiding ourselves
through life is you know how much
friction do we experience before we say
you know what like I'm not a musician
and I'm cool with that I love music but
I'm going to put my efforts into these
other things and you know this thing
comes more easily for me that you know I
do think we have a lot of natural
tendencies and I feel like especially in
the United States there's been this
complicated relationship with parenting
and education whereby we we don't want
to push people to their own you know
like suffering and demise but we also
have to avoid not pushing them because
then they don't ever find what they are
proficient in and they don't learn that
overcoming friction thing um so it's
It's Tricky I do believe everyone has a
unique expression of themselves in life
whatever that is doesn't have to be in
professional life but you to try a lot
of different things and you know how at
what point you uh you bail out I mean
I've had few in my lab but I've spoken
to graduate students in posto where I
had to say you know what I actually had
this conversation with the post I was
like you know what you're a really good
scientist you're never going to be a
professor let's get you a job in biotech
and they were like they thought their
whole life they were going to be a
professor like you're not and the data
are the following which point to that
and it's kind of devastating but then
years later they thank me or they
thanked me in that case yeah a few
others probably curs me but so how do
you know when to keep pushing your kid
to even engage in something like maybe
they're the kid that
always is picked last for the team but
you know they should play sports so I
guess my first reaction is I'm I'm
reacting to the word pushing cuz I'm not
not sure that's
the like the verb I would think about
because I think the idea of pushing your
kid even like how much do I push there's
there's a lot about us there is like is
that my I guess I grew up in a town
where a lot of kids got pushed oh I mean
I grew up in a town where every kid got
pushed so maybe that's why I know
something about it right I mean I think
we see this all the time and it goes
back to actually what side of the tennis
court like whose feelings are who's like
is this my unlived dreams as a athlete
in my youth or is this actually about my
kid soccer skills you know I think
parents watching their kids playing
sports is a prime example of am I living
out my unfulfilled dreams and projecting
that onto my daughter or does my
daughter like soccer and like how can I
really differentiate those right I think
actually though making it back to that a
lot of this actually goes back to
frustration tolerance and why it matters
so much to me like my approach to
teaching frustration tolerance which is
like a Hidden Gem we have here at good
inside I really want I I want to be in
every school I think it needs to be in
every school and I want to describe it
to you okay so I I literally have this
graph it's helpful and I know you like
to write things down to to make it
concrete we're like point one is not
knowing how to do something okay and
point two which is very far away is
let's say knowing how to do it or being
very proficient this could be soccer I
think a good example is reading okay
like you everybody starts out not
knowing how to read and let's say not
everybody but a large a lot of people
learn how to read the fr the the the
space between not knowing and knowing I
call the Learning space it has a name
and it's helpful to know where you are
in a map and the learning space has one
feeling that you're supposed to have
frustration that is the feeling you're
supposed to have and we have this idea
that we sh from not knowing to
knowing like this it's because of those
damn Star Wars movies and oh no actually
Star Wars Incorporated some frustration
but it's because of movies boom you're
supposed to just have the skill because
you picked up the rock or the sword or
the the pen or the wand well and now
it's because if you think about the
circuitry that kids get used to with
dopamine and the space between wanting
and having in general is low because
when you don't know something you want
to know it here you do know
it our tolerance and our kids tolerance
for wanting and not having is so low
that what's so sad is the learning space
has gotten massively compressed and
people fear frustration this image when
I've gone over this with kids and even
teachers I know teachers who teach us in
their class okay today we're going to
learn this new thing we're going to
learn whatever it is the you know how to
read a short word
everybody in this class is here not
knowing everybody in this class is going
to get here and probably today most of
us and you can actually do it m are
going to be right here what does this
say the learning space how are we
supposed to feel when we're in the
learning space the class can say
frustrated okay here's an interesting
assignment different than you think the
goal today is not to tell me if you can
read the letters that are in front of
you I want you to raise your hand when
you feel frustrated which feels like
this oh I can't do it because I'm going
to come up to you and I'm going to give
you a high five and I'm going to say you
are in the learning space you are
learning how amazing is that like Andrew
I really believe this has like the power
to change learning because then when we
talk about proficiency or when we talk
about years from now my kid is saying
this happens all the time I get
questions about this all the time my kid
says they want to do whatever is it
could be a coding class it could be a
lacrosse class and they do it once and
then they always come home and they say
I want to do it I quit or maybe they're
on a swim team they want to quit do I
let my kid quit right to me the question
is actually
like most likely none of our kids are
going to be Olympic swimmers or like
professional basketball players I think
about this a lot with orts the whole
goal in my mind for most people with
orts not everyone but most is learning
how to deal with frustration learning
how to do things you thought you
couldn't do character sharing being a
good teammate sportsmanship right all
those things are hard skills to learn so
the reason I'm signing my kid up for
basketball is actually just because it's
like a good medium for all those things
and so I want to be sure that if my kid
is quitting it's not because they're
escaping the very very natural learning
space that is so important to be in in
life and this happened actually my
oldest wanted to quit baseball he'
played for years and he wanted to quit
in in the conversation we ended up
having was look let's wait to the end of
the season like and this goes back to
values it's not we don't quit but like
in our family we we really value and try
as much as we can to keep our
commitments and not just to ourselves to
each other and so the rest of the season
you might be thinking all the time I
don't want to be doing this and again in
my head I'm thinking good that's like a
good life experience to watch yourself
go through that as long as it's not
toxic and at the end you know we'll talk
talk about it interestingly enough he
had the best baseball season he'd ever
had he had a grand slam which no shade
to baseball that's as exciting as youth
baseball ever gets right and still he
was like they I'm done like I just want
and I felt really good about that I was
like look you you you ended on like
you're playing really well it wasn't
just cuz you got moved down in the
batting order like if that's the reason
why I K get moved down to the batting
order they're not starting on basketball
I hear this all the time now they want
to quit I don't have any any rigid rules
but if that becomes a pattern that
worries me or not worries me but forget
you sports that's just not a great
circuitry that would be conducive with
kind of resilience and confidence in
adulthood look I love love love this
concept which I believe to be entirely
true that the learning space between
unskilled and skilled if you will yes
that's what it is is characterized by
the feeling of frustration in mind and
body yes I don't want to Rattle off
another experiment but there is just oh
so much date I I'll share this with you
offline um the papers that is showing
that brain plasticity changes in neural
circuitry only occur when the chemical
milu of the brain is different than it
normally is otherwise how would the
brain know it should change so what sets
the context for massive change in our
neural circuitry is when there's a lot
of adrenaline in the body sorry folks
it's true adrenaline also called
epinephrine and nor epinephrine released
in the brain now you don't want to be in
a state of panic or or stress to the
point where you're
debilitated but that shift in the
chemical milu sets the stage
for rewiring of connections between
neurons I mean this is known at the
molecular level it's known at the
cellular level it's known at the circuit
level and I'm excited to share that
literature with you because it it just
basically is a bunch of nerd speak um uh
and numbers to support the fact that
you're nailing it right in the Bull's
Eye which is without frustration there
is no rewiring of the neural circuits
and if you think about it it had to be
that way right otherwise why would the
circuits change so that the error signal
is what sets plasticity in motion now
the actual rewiring occurs during sleep
so this is my reminder to make sure that
your kids get enough sleep because
that's when the actual this is the
phenomenon of not being able to do
something coming back a few days or
weeks later you're like can do it well
because it happened in sleep the final
portion of the rewiring it's why phone
shouldn't be in the bedroom for kids I
think 75% of people young between the
age of seven and 18 are massively sleep
deprived and you know there's the the
neural rewiring deficits associated with
that are are are serious and these are
what we call sensitive periods uh I like
sensitive periods more than critical
periods because critical periods imply
an open and shut sensitive is there's a
tapering but it does taper yeah so um
this unskilled to Skilled um and ation
in the learning space model this is part
of something that you're putting
together now could you could you I
already have it I mean our frustration
tolerance program it's a workshop it's
you know on our our it's within our
membership right so it's one of you know
it's one of 30 workshops to me it's one
where you know the thing is no parents
say Dr Becky what I'm really dealing
with is low frustration tolerance you
know they'll say I have you know my kid
is having Tantrums or they won't do
their homework or kids with ADHD tend to
have low frustration tolerance right so
um to me it's like one of the first
things I recommend to new members where
I say okay you might like this is the
thing this is like the key thing that
underlies a lot of Tantrums it underlies
entitlement it underlies not sharing it
underlies why you throw the board game
when you're about to lose and underlies
quitting it's not homework and again the
MGI the most generous interpretation is
wait right the commonality in all those
situations is my kid is
frustrated and if what they're learning
or what they've practiced is when I feel
frustrated it's so intense that
sometimes I think like do our kids learn
that their emotions operate on a dimmer
switch or an onoff switch we want our
kids to operate on a dimmer like you
said if you're at a 10 out of 10 nothing
you can't operate but if every time and
I'm so interested in this literature you
mentioned because I was thinking what
would happen in the first number of
years of a kid's life if every time
they're
frustrated well-intentioned but again
just under resource parents turn it
off then what I think would happen and
I'm wondering is then something that
could be like a five out of 10 I feel
like would feel like a 10 out of 10
because you never had a dimmer right
because if you only operated when a
light went on with always going off then
even if over time years later the light
was at a five it's still going to feel
blinding right and so this idea of a
dimmer you want your kids when they're
frustrated that's what frustration in
tolerance is nobody says I'm frustrated
I can't read yay no one says that but if
it kind of comes up oh there's that
light we want their bodies to think okay
all I need to do and I have skills to
get my nine out of 10 to an eight an
eight to a seven when I'm at a seven
that's where learning happens that's
very different than it's at a nine and
kind of like who's going to turn it off
for me or the reason in those situations
cuz say I'm not doing my homework is
they don't have the skills to bring it
to a seven and so their choice is to
stay at a nine or 10 out of 10 which no
human can do or walk away and bring it
to a zero and so what I'm saying is our
frustration tolerance Workshop which I
want every parent to take but I also
just want to get into schools um is
literally the thing that helps you teach
your kids how to get frustration TS how
to you really can do this it sounds sick
but like you can get your kids to like
being in the learning space to be like
like I I'm going to thrive here the Good
Feeling is eventually going to come I'm
relatively comfortable here because I I
just have watched myself survive it that
many times and so the benefits of that
workshop and it just the program is not
only Tantrums but actually is is a lot
in academics CU that so many times when
kids have issues in school I'm not ADHD
is real dyslexia is real that definitely
could be a component but so many times
It's actually an issue of frustration
tolerance and that's often not kind of
labeled for
parents I'm um realizing as you're
saying this that the literature that I'm
aware of about stress and Trauma is
actually relevant here in an interesting
and perhaps surprising way whereby you
know this thing I said earlier you know
the brain only changes under conditions
where norepinephrine and epinephrine are
released you know there is such a thing
as one trial learning and it's
associated with negative experiences and
the reason negative experiences create
such robust learning in only one trial
is because there's a massive amount of
epinephrine and norepinephrine and other
neurochemicals released so it's stamped
into the nervous system but learning of
things we want to learn relies on the
same neurochemicals I mean there's a
wild and really cool literature from a
guy named James mcau um who showed that
like if you spike adrenaline before
learning the learning is much faster and
much more durable if you spike
adrenaline after learning turns out the
learning is more
durable now we can't start getting into
kind of uh you know biohacking
experiments on on kids or themselves but
that the adrenaline is supposed to come
during the learning itself which is what
you're saying but the problem is if we
stop once we're frustrated we get the
increase in Adrenaline and
norepinephrine and again other
neurochemicals as well but then the
perception is that the the plasticity
Loop is closed there so what did you
learn when I do hard things I get
frustrated when I stop the the
frustration goes away yes that's all you
learn in the same way that somebody
exposed to trauma this underlies the
basis of almost all modern trauma
therapies is to in the right setting
take people back through it sequentially
let them experience that and start to
desensitize to it so they can complete
that Loop yeah that's exactly right and
so I think it's so important to push
through frustration and I think it's so
important as you I'm just agreeing with
you here clearly
but that oftentimes that frustration can
last more than just the learning session
it can be weeks or months or in some
cases a year of a really challenging
course or a sports sports uh
participation and so that's where it
gets tough because as empathic creatures
one hopes we hate to see members of our
own species suffer especially our kids
and so it becomes this thing of like do
you let them opt out like what did they
learn by opting out and that's where it
gets really complicated cuz we got a
forbrain which can set all these
different rules and so um but can I I
don't know about frustration for a year
I guess I always think how we experience
a feeling is the feeling plus the story
We Tell ourselves about the
feeling and the feeling kind of is at a
certain level but the story we tell
oursel about the feeling and what it
means about us or how capable we are of
coping with it that can make a feeling
that was here go to here something about
frustration of a year like I it's
interesting we're talking so much about
stories but again if one of the things I
try as a parent is when my kid is saying
I don't know what would it be to quit
you know
I I hate gymnastics right and you're
thinking okay like first of all quitting
is not always weak or wrong sometimes
quitting is a very brave awesome great
thing to do definitely sometimes the
absolute best thing to do 100% but as a
parent sometimes and I get this a lot
like I'm conflicted like I don't know
what's right first of all there's
probably not a right and again our
parenting never hangs on one decision so
just let that go but I think what I
would be curious to just experiment with
again maybe it's because I'm so obsessed
with frustration tolerance especially in
this world that is so working against
frustration tolerance I feel like it's
like even my more my duty as a parent to
help so I'm like okay let's just have an
experiment where I would say okay talk
to me about why you want to quit
gymnastics and I'm might know in the
back of my head maybe they're not as
good as everyone anymore right or maybe
they just don't like it who knows but I
might say you know look maybe this isn't
relevant I'm thinking about when I did
you know I'm thinking about a different
sport um when I did track growing up and
there were like whole years where I was
like I love track I love track and I
don't know if I ever told you this but
when I was 11 I hate a track I went from
love to hate it
and part of it was and again say
something kind of relevant to your kid
part of it was there was a new kid at
school and like I was kind of the track
star until she came in and then I was
like second and that just kind of stunk
and no I didn't tell myself it's okay I
kind of told myself this stinks every
day and part of it was all my friends
were doing soccer and I kind of felt
left
out but I finished the year and the next
year something interesting happened and
this is what a kid will say I'll go oh
what you love track again you know and
it's this amazing moment because they're
always going to say that to be like no
no I ended up deciding that next year is
my last year at track and I I stopped
after that but can't explain it it just
it felt like it came from like a
different place it almost like I felt
more settled I think after like I really
knew and I don't know if that's relevant
to gymnastics I do know you've loved it
for a while it's kind of new to not like
it and sometimes when something's new
and you don't like it you just got to
though but other times when something's
new and you don't like it you want to
like figure it out and I don't know I'm
wondering if we should give it a few
more weeks to try the figuring it out
thing and again maybe your kid says no I
want to quit and you're like fine and in
some way have' already had the
experience what no matter what they do
but I think that's that's what I think
about playing around with with kids way
more than I think what parents say is so
should they quit or not it's so binary
it's so so rigid and I think we're
missing the Nuance of the story and the
process that matters more than the
eventual
decision I love your use of story in um
narrative with your kids it seems like
you use that a lot I do like instead of
saying you know and uh forgive me for
I'm not I'm not an analyst but I I feel
like it starts with an observation like
okay you're behaving this way maybe
what's behind the behavior you're
expressing this what's maybe deeper to
that but
um when talking about your own
experiences towards your kids as you've
been doing here in these pseudo
hypotheticals I'm sure some of them is
this we interview your kids later and
find out no I'm kidding the
um it's clear that you use story as a
way to kind of um share genuinely but
also probe for what might be going on
with them and I have to say I find it um
really delightful because it it it it
raises lots of questions that I think
anyone would have and I think it's um
it's part of your gift clearly because
um so many people you know follow your
advice and and take but the advice you
give is also it's interesting it's like
an observation like frustration is key I
want to increase frustration to
tolerance but then you're not like okay
you're going to hammer down their
throats frustration tolerance in the
following way it sort of becomes a a
question like where is there frustration
in your life and and then you put it
into your own narrative as opposed to
necessarily asking them questions I
think asking kids questions or asking
people questions generally is great like
hey how can I do better as you pointed
out earlier um but it's really I don't
know if the word is disarming but it's
really in a in
a entirely positive way way like you use
your own narrative to allow people start
going oh yeah like where am I
experiencing frustration where where
could I tolerate that better and so I
think that there's this incredible Triad
of like or or tripartite thing of like
observe
consider like the deeper layer and then
offering a narrative that's really a
bunch of
questions when where you're speaking
from your real truth it's really elegant
I have to say it's it's spectacular I
hadn't realize it until right now I
don't know if I realized those parts but
you know what is is interesting is it
brings up the word we kind of mentioned
before but didn't talk about and maybe
it'll be surprising that I say this is
shame and I I think
shame it is the biggest blocker to
learning and shame I think can be
defined like a lot of things in many
ways but it's the experience of
aloneness I think shame is the feeling
you have when you kind of feel like a
part of you is not attachable so for a
kid that's an existential threat to not
be in attachment with someone and in
that way when you're not attachable
you're alone you're
alone and so so many of the things that
happen with our kids because I'll I'll
I'll model another story and maybe I'll
get some flak for this because it's it's
probably
counterintuitive but I think about like
one of my one of my kids my resilient
Rebel who was in a hitting stage when he
was younger hitting and he's just also
in like a he was in like a couple weeks
he was hitting and then and there was
this one there was this one time where
we were doing a family puzzle and he was
younger he was probably like three it
was really hard it was more for my older
kids he was kind of doing his own thing
I think he was playing with blocks on
the side we leave we come back and like
couple of the puzzle pieces were missing
thing that we're in and I just knew I
knew it he saw it I know most generous
interpretation he felt like oh my God I
can't participate what the rest of the
family is doing and so you know what I'm
going to do cuz I'm a smart kid I'm just
going to stop them from participating
and so I'm going to take the puzzle
pieces and hide them I just I knew it I
know him so we come back and we' worked
really hard on this puzzle of course
you're angry but again I can either do
nothing on the outside or do nothing on
the inside in that moment not always but
chose to be an adult and I was just like
I know you took the puzzle pieces I just
want you know and he's like what are you
talk no I didn't you know maybe his four
no I didn't and I was like we're working
on this puzzle I get that is probably
frustrating but like you need I'm not I
didn't have the puzzle pieces that was
not
working and then this is truly going
back to stories and going back to shame
if you feel like you're the bad kid
who's doing bad
things and you're the only one who's
like that you are shut down from
learning so I went up to him on the
couch and my husband I remember watching
me being like what are you doing and
this is how I started I go I don't know
if I can tell you this which any kids
like I don't know if I can tell you
this when I
was probably about
seven I did something really bad that's
what I said and he was like I can't even
tell you he was like
he like every part of his anger like
diffused and you can really draw a kid
in by just saying to them I can't tell
you I've never told anyone I go okay and
this this is true I go my sister was two
and she had these like oil
stickers and I really wanted them and I
asked my
mom and she said no we couldn't go to
the store no those are you know my
sister's
stickers and you're never going to guess
what I did
and he was like I don't know you asked
her for them you waited you know and I
was like
no I took
them but that's not the worst part he
said
what and I go my mom asked me if I took
them I knew I did so you know what I
told her and he said you told her yes
and I go
no I told her no
and he literally
goes and I I feel like in that moment
what's happening is he's saying like so
many things that you can never say
didactically like Mom like you're my mom
I love you I hold you on a pedestal and
like even
you did something that wasn't so great
there's like so much hope and goodness
and then I didn't in that moment I did
not say and you cannot say in these
situations so now you can tell me the
you just have to like
trust because I think the shame of the
Badness shame freezes you right as an
Animal Defense state right shame freezes
you so a kid who's lying to you is
always in shame and you can't get a kid
to unfreeze and move to a different
place of telling you the truth if you're
adding more shame through fear like the
math doesn't work but you can through
stories now
true story he did not right after that
say you
know I was just like I remember my
husband who we okay with me saying this
he was like we have to punish him we
have you know we have to punish him I
was like in the moment that's going to
feel very cathartic to us that's what
punishment does it makes you feel very
powerful it makes you feel very
cathartic it doesn't work it just
doesn't especially not with kids who are
strong willed I was like just give it a
couple
days it's probably a good three days
later
and he brought me the puzzle pieces in a
bag and he just
said I took them and he truly started
crying and I did not lecture him I feel
like the whole Arc the whole lesson Had
basically already happened honestly like
the day after or so again and this is
what I think we miss as parents and like
we're almost afraid to like just name
the humanness of it and I kind of gave
an example earlier he's going to want to
do something bad again we all want to do
bad things that's not a bad urge it's
just about having the skills to do
something differently when you have the
urge so I think a couple days later and
I do this I do these little like role
plays they take like 20 seconds I was
like oh my
goodness look at the puzzle cuz we'
still been working on it what if you
want to take it again he goes I won't I
go I know but I think you might want to
remember how I took the oilies so you're
acknowledging that inside him there
might be a piece that still wants to do
the wrong feelings and that's an urge I
teach my kids an urge means you want to
do something my kids will say an urge is
not a behavior behavior is doing the
thing that's not okay but the only
reason your urge doesn't convert into
behavior is because you have a skill to
manage the urge and you can't build
skills if no one teaches you them so I
said what could you do instead could you
run to me and say I really want to take
the pieces could you say I need time
with you because at the end of the day I
think he felt left out and and we did
and by the way this kid is he like
perfect now no he you know but like
it it brings together so many things
when number one when we trust ourself
that we have time when we realize shame
the fear of being the only one being bad
being unlovable being alone is often the
biggest blocker for kids when you really
realize that punishment and sending your
kid away makes no sense at all and you
can kind of give yourself freedom to
tell stories right because when we're
really struggling with something you
don't want to look at someone especially
someone who's perfect right it's like
when you really have a bad experience as
an adult the only thing you want to hear
is your friend who I like you know I'm
mortified I sent this email to my boss
the only thing that would make me feel
better is someone like let me show you
the email I sent I'm like oh well that's
worse that's the only thing that makes
me feel better not because I wish bad
upon other people but because you want
to know you're not alone and other
people's stories through that like
vulnerability
it's kind of like it's like this magic
this magic trick I mean is pretty far
away from the parenting um Dynamic but
um the understanding and actual data
from like 12 step programs and group
therapy generally um including trauma
therapy that is of a group therapy
nature uh fully supports everything you
said hearing the uh terrible or Andor
humiliating things that people have done
or have done to them as awful as that
sounds you know is is often what
underlies people's willingness to
recover ability to recover and then they
become the teachers over time like you
said I think um you said so many
incredible things there but right at the
end you said something that I hope
everyone internalizes that when you do
something
embarrassing maybe even humiliating the
last thing you want to hear is look it's
all going to be fine the thing that
actually helps is somebody who has
experienced something similar and is
doing fine yeah and I use that at
management all like we had someone do a
presentation at work and it was for a
bunch of people and it did not go well
and I met with her and she knew it kind
of didn't go well and honestly the only
thing I said to her I don't even manage
her directly she's more Junior and and I
really mean this we had in Clinical
Psychology grad school like it's intense
you do a session when you're first doing
sessions and like everyone's watching
you they're like watching you do therapy
which is helpful you know but I remember
my first one and I felt like pretty okay
about it I was like this my first one I
was okay I I it I got I got torn to
shreds they were like that was not good
you know and now obviously I'm on the I
feel good about my clinical abilities
but the only thing I said to her is I
was like look and and I shared it with
her and I said like I've been there like
eventually I look back on that helped me
learn that day I just felt awful I
wasn't like this is my learning space
moment you know and so if you're you're
feeling like that I just want to let you
know like I've been there too this is
the starting point to getting better
this is going to like make you stronger
I know that I've lived that and I I I
think storytelling in that way is
probably like a really underutilized
kind of quote tool almost dehumanizes it
to call it that in in management and in
any
relationship I love it and I feel like
the story of your son bringing those
puzzle pieces back is like ah there's so
much there so much and the fact that
there was a delay and then he he brought
it back on his own accord and um and
that you had already kind of Let It Go
that that's I feel like a really
interesting piece that it wasn't um to
like appease you it was really something
internal for him like he got the
lesson for him it wasn't just about like
making mom feel okay about him like he
clearly understood you still love him
but it wasn't about like fixing
something externally as much as it was
about fixing something internally which
I think is the the addressing and
overcoming the shame piece I think
that's right and that's the thing like I
think so many times like this like are
we teaching kids what to think or how to
think like after they're gone from our
house like it's the how to think and you
said questions I love kind of Socratic
questions for kids like oh like if again
a different version of a story would be
like okay I know you didn't take the
puzzle pieces but I'm just thinking for
me like what would make me take puzzle
pieces oh I wonder if I felt left out or
I wonder if I was just really trying to
get my parents' attention for a while
and this is the only way to do it and
what would I do after and what would I
need now I'm going to get emotional what
would I need to know about myself or
from my parent for me to share that I
did take
it maybe I would need to know that my
parents knew I was a good kid H anyway
sorry what were we talking about like
cuz your kids eventually make good
decision adult make good decisions for
themselves because they ask themselves
the right
questions that not because they've heard
their parents specific lesson right
because they're able to say to
themselves like what am I feeling right
now what am I really looking for why did
I do that so like asking questions
telling stories asking questions without
even answering them actually provokes a
much more sophisticated developmental
process in your kid than the lectures we
all me included trust me plenty of times
that my kid that I've just lectured them
but again they're just catharsis they're
not actually terribly effective yeah um
if ever there was some core truths about
brain plasticity it's that
frustration is associated with the
chemicals that um Foster Brain Change we
know that and that questions have a
really interesting impact on learning
which sounds kind of like a duh of
course they do but when we ask questions
it creates this open loop in the brain
that the brain wants to solve as opposed
to hearing a statement this why I always
felt like those um pictures on office
walls like motivation when you blah blah
blah like the motivational statements
don't mean much in terms of because
they're not about verb States when we
ask questions we put our brain into kind
of a process of verb states of asking
what behaviors are going to lead to
which outcomes there's an interesting
literature about this that um you know
probably isn't fully relevant here but
it gets back to trying to learn basic
motor tasks and the same things are
applied to basic cognitive tasks of like
how do I solve this and puzzle is a
great um example because it's both
cognitive and motor like you're fixing
these pieces in different ways I have to
get back to doing some puzzles I'm
realizing and emotional you know I can
really embarrass myself but one of my
favorite things that I again I've just
noticed my kids extending for for
puzzles because they all did a lot of
puzzles when they were young is so funny
I remember my kid doing like this puzzle
and getting some frustration what I did
is I did a puzzle to the side of him
instead of doing it perfectly I kind of
like mimicked I was like oh this doesn't
fit oh it's not that piece okay and one
of the things I noticed this one when my
kid was really young is he kids have a
really hard time with puzzles and it's
kind of a metaphor for life for when a
piece doesn't
fit they keep trying it when what they
really need to do is such a metaphor is
put it down and pick up another piece
right but I could tell my kid that but
I'm not I always feel like just telling
doesn't really work this is what I did
not joking I'm going to sing get ready
okay so I was doing it over here and I
just go oh it's not fitting it's not
fitting here it's not fitting here and I
go if it doesn't fit put it to the side
and try another
piece and then I was like oh right I can
put this on okay I'll get this one and I
didn't make it for I was like oh oh oh
that one fits there
right I have heard not anymore kids are
too old but there was a time I remember
me and my husband were like outside the
playroom and we heard our son like
singing the song it's just it's a mantra
it's
self-regulation because is it cognitive
is it physical it's also emotional it
goes back to frustration tolerance where
our kids need they need mantras they
need skills they need songs to actually
uplevel their skills to regulate the
emotions that get in their way of doing
great things
right and you know that kid is
interesting like not really anymore now
that I think about I want to revive it
he makes up songs Through situations
what an amazing skill right but this
stuff can like and if anyone's hearing
this they like oh that's unrealistic
like it's amazing you do it one time one
time make up a silly song model the
frustration yourself make up a song
struggle again and then get success
whatever it is it could be with reading
with a puzzle with putting on your your
sock it could be oh it doesn't fit I'm
taking a deep breath and trying it again
it could literally be anything cuz it
adds a little play and jooy you probably
know what song does in the brain better
than I do but probably regulating um I
would put money that a parents be like
that's so weird Becky you're right it
didn't take that much time I did it one
time and my kids started singing the
song and now they put their socks on by
themselves I love it you taught a
process through song and um there
actually is a lot of data on music in
the brain and how it organizes things
mostly in the form of a story of a
beginning middle and end and just the
quickest example I can give is um when
we learn our ABCs we learn them in song
Right ABC you never forget that right um
it's much easier to learn things through
rhythmic song little motifs than it is
um through a list of letters or numbers
does our brain like encode it differ
yeah so see it it fragments it into a
beginning middle and end and then
there's an under repetitive sort of wave
a b c d e okay here I'm now I'm singing
so you know at risk of of you know
embarrassing both inducing all sorts of
bad neural uh responses in listeners but
uh you get the point it's it's it's a
waveform that the brain can recognize I
actually have a friend who's a very
accomplished musician and I was say and
I know the lyrics to his songs very well
and I said you remember that song he
goes well I have to hear the the
underlying Melody and then he can
remember all the words he's a singer
he's a lead singer in a very very
well-known band he doesn't even know the
words to his own songs if you just ask
them for him but you give him the music
and he's just out the gate and he can do
this in front of tens of thousands of
people so then it is a cheat code for
coping skills if you put it to song it
it becomes a verb process sorry I didn't
mean to cut you off there it's almost
like saying like the mechanics of
writing are you pick up you put the pen
between you you know there's a um
there's a whole Rhythm to writing
there's a whole sequence of motor
sequence that we that we learn or eating
or anything for that matter um no one
who's an expert piano player thinks
about playing the individual keys at the
point where they've learned it they've
they've batched it into it's sort of
like chunking but it has an underlying
Rhythm that's carried by a neural
circuit that allows the expression of
the movements of the fingers or the or
the the words out the mouth or in this
case overcoming frustration to just kind
of ride on top of all of it yeah so um
there's an unconscious genius to to what
you uh what you did and I love it maybe
um as long as nobody hears me saying oh
I'll need to sing more to get through
frustration um
I have a question about Miss Edson yes
um people are going be like what um
before we started recording you shared
with us um something I think is entirely
appropriate to what we're talking about
now which is uh learning and learning
hard things and frustration tolerance
and you've evolved these Concepts you
know in the course of your work and
through your own parenting child
relationships um clearly your own and
then yours with your kids who was Miss
Edson and what did she teach you because
when you told me this I was like whoa
that's super valuable we all need to
know about this yes so miss Edson was my
second grade teacher and I remember
writing in her class and I remember
something she told us and it's truly
something that shapes me every day and
she said if something feels too hard to
start it just means that the first step
isn't small enough and then she really
kind of made this even more concrete
because what I remember in her class
writing and I still use this in writing
today is okay so something feels too
hard to do the implication is it doesn't
mean it's my fault it doesn't mean I
can't doesn't mean I'm stupid it
literally just means the first step
isn't small enough that's very
actionable and so the way I play around
with it now even in my own writing is
okay I have to write a new article and
I'm like I can't do that okay so I'm in
I can't mode okay if something is in I
can't mode if it feels too hard I hear
her voice it just means the first step
isn't small enough so I'll make it
literally I'll just make it smaller I'm
going to write a page today and then
often I'm like I can't do that okay
smaller a paragraph no and I literally
do it until and some days it's a word
and I go you know what I could write a
word okay now okay right and I I really
think Miss Edson was ahead of her time I
mean obviously now we talk a lot about
frustration tolerance growth mindset but
this really is a way of saying when
things are hard it's not your fault and
there's something you can do to build
the circuit of capability because I
think when we're trying to do something
hard there are like if you think about
it I don't know you're on the top of a
ski mountain and on the one side is that
I can't it's too hard and the other side
is I can we all have natural capability
I I really believe this every person but
it's just about figuring out how to get
your
skis like to the beginning of the ski
slope and then maybe if we've practiced
being on the I can't do hard things
slope our skis keep trying to turn but
we just have to keep getting them back
and so if we tell ourselves I can't do
this and we just stay there stagnant but
if you say wait smaller smaller smaller
smaller like I used this with the client
a while ago I can't ask my boss for a
raise I know I deserve
cool no problem let's make it smaller
okay what would be smaller I don't know
let's get creative could you write down
what you would say okay no could you say
the word to me five times out loud raise
raise raise raise raise I remember she
laughed she go I can do that cool let's
start there okay she literally did that
what I think is so powerful about Miss
edson's
advice is as soon as we get even our
skis a tiny bit into the I can circuit
the I can slope we're actually just a
lot more likely to stay there or at
least that becomes a bigger part of our
identity right so with this woman that I
was working on this with one of the
things we were working on it was just
okay so you did that amazing the next
thing I even just had her play around
things saying to me can you say to me I
deserve a raise it was very interesting
she had I think this is one of the
reasons she had trouble speaking up for
it it was really hard for her to embody
that we said that she couldn't I
remember a week she said I'm going to
write it down and bring it she didn't
again like parenting I didn't punish her
I didn't send her to her room I said
Okay that was just too big let's make it
smaller let's write it together we wrote
some things down there right I then had
her write it as an email and send it to
me and I then had her practice it with
her best
friend and then she asked her boss for a
raise like I mean like I don't even this
like probably no one's surprised yeah
like that makes sense she'd gone through
a lot of steps but it's just applicable
in every area of your life so even
anyone listening we all have something
in our I can't category this is too hard
or I can't and we just stay there and if
you if you hear Miss
Edson saying wait if something feels too
hard to do it only means that the first
step isn't small enough and if then the
next smallest step feels too hard no
biggie like no judgment make it smaller
make it smaller make it smaller and then
allow yourself to eventually build up
from there love it love Miss Edson I'm
gonna thank you and Miss Edson yes thank
you Miss Edson I I think the idea of
lowering the stakes to be able to move
forward is just spectacular yeah and in
everything and um I noticed you do that
by the way I'm not like analyzing I'm
just saying you do that with with
parenting I think there's so much
tension around this notion of like
creating healthy productive functional
kids and I think there is a lot of Shame
for parents that when things aren't
going great and people know it or they
know it and um the idea of creating
lower Stakes um in order to be able to
make pretty big moves over time where
where they're required or just do
nothing when sometimes that's what's
required yeah and and that the
similarity is so interesting what I
think that the powerful thing about Miss
edson's advice is is she's almost saying
make something small enough so you can
get your first win having a win is
really powerful it's kind of Addicting
you're like what's my next win right
you're on the Wind circuit you know one
of the reasons um we want to create so
many more resources for parents and when
parents come to us and even say this is
a problem this is a problem this is a
problem I often just start I I would say
okay like what is the smallest thing
would change that would make you when
you go to bed at night be like today was
a better day like there's some bigger
stuff I hear you probably not going to
tackle that we'll tackle that in time
but like I want to get you a win today
and then all of a sudden when a parent
starts to build it's kind of their own
self-efficacy their own like oh wait I
did feel good about that one moment I
did feel more connected to my kid I said
this one
thing it's it's I simp it's momentum you
know and we have to give ourselves the
opportunity to build
momentum um which really usually only
starts by by taking the smallest step
anyway I think it's spectacular I um I
was going to ask you uh and I never do
this but I was going to ask you you know
if there were one thing that people
could start the process of trying to be
a better parent better to themselves you
know if it's more about you know more
about emotional containment Etc um maybe
it's this thing of you know asking you
know at the end of today like what would
be one thing that would allow me to have
said it was a better day would that
would that be it certainly that's
powerful I'm going to give you two
things one is kind of a one small thing
but it's kind of a bigger theoretical
thing and one thing is is very very very
concrete um so the bigger thing I I
really believe that the single biggest
thing that gets in our way of feeling
more empowered and capable as
parents is that as much as we say we
value parenting and I think parents
people do who are parents are like yeah
what do I care about more than parenting
it's kind of the lowest on our list in
terms of what we invest
in you know people invest in all types
of things and I want to be clear yes
like we have an offering at good inside
in our membership but that's not what I
mean for someone listening they might be
like there is that parent coach in my
town who I've been like saying I'm going
to call or maybe it's a therapist or
maybe it's a parenting group at your
school or maybe someone listens to me
and they're like no offense Dr Becky
there's someone else I follow on
Instagram and they have a course and I
like them better I I'd be like do that
today like
align your even purchasing decisions
with your values like that that and
because we're not expected to know this
naturally we're not and as long as we
don't have the resources around us a
little kind of someone described it to
me as like a onesie TWY thing like it it
it's it's just not giving ourself what
we deserve it is like a surgeon saying
they're not good at surgery when you
find out they never went to medical
school or residency You' be like well
just didn't really get resourced in the
way you deserve for this very
challenging job so that would really be
the thing if I'm really honest because
I'm not as much as I'm about a quick win
I'm not about a quick fix I think that
just sets us up for more like a
Band-Aid having said that I love a quick
thing so a couple things I think people
can do with their
kids telling your kid at night and I'll
model how would say it like I think most
people it's not just me when you put
your kid to bed it's like oh you're like
I just want to be on the couch but it's
when your kid's willing to spend five
extra minutes with you because it's the
cruel irony at night you want time
without your kids and they just want a
little bit more time with you if you
allow yourself to lean in and you can
just say to your kid almost like in a
whisper I think whispering to your kid
is one of the most underutilized
symbolist strategies whispers are so
sacred they feel sacred they feel like
they know they're just for you
whispering to your kid like I just want
to tell
you there's nothing you could ever do
that would make me stop loving
you or I just want to tell you you're a
really good kid we're in a hard stage
but I will never
ever ever think of you as anything but a
really good kid don't expect your kid to
say
anything but just that takes 10 seconds
and if you're like Whispering feels
awkward don't whisper just say it like
doesn't matter if you're thinking you
don't know my kid they're teenager text
them text them sometimes a text to a
teen can feel like an unexpected whisper
from a parent you know um and that's it
and that and that's that's the single
thing today and then maybe I'm going to
add a third just do something like that
for your yourself give yourself credit
put your hand on your heart tell
yourself it's parenting things really
hard like I'm doing enough I'm not
messing up my kid forever that's not a
thing like and I've got
this
awesome
well this whole thing that you've
tempted to take on is also really hard
and you're doing incredible work
educating people on how to parent I
there's so many things that you've said
today I'm not going to recap them all um
you know we do time stamps and all that
so can people can find them but in no
particular order I mean um you know this
concept of you know telling a kid your
right to notice when they when they
notice something important in you or in
others or in themselves um that rigidity
is the
enemy um asking like what's this really
about when they're doing or saying
something or expressing themselves in a
way that feels confusing or maybe
especially when it's
irritating um
encouraging frustration as a route to
learning like incredible and then you
said the more that you can locate
somebody the more you respect their
values which I think is incredible and
on and on I mean there's just so many
gems in today's conversation and and so
many actionable gems that you provide on
social
media uh through your
courses through conversations like this
and others that you're holding in other
podcasts and I just want to thank you so
much uh you know I you're teaching
people how to parent others how to think
about their own parenting oh yes that's
the other one you said the the only kind
of parenting that we do reflexively is
the one that was done for us which will
evoke um you know feelings of relaxation
in some people and feelings of dread in
others and um but it all just speaks to
the importance of paying attention to to
this thing that we call parenting and I
think the way that you're merging this
with a thoughtful eye on technology
where it's taking us and where there are
concerns as well as you know where it
can be utilized it's just fantastic I I
can't say enough good things about the
work that you're doing and I'm just so
grateful that you're doing it and I'm
saying that on behalf of myself and
everyone else so you're you're making
the world a better place so thank you so
much for joining today and for for
sharing so much uh we'll of course point
out where people can find you but just
keep going it's awesome I've learned to
ton I know everyone else has as well
thank you I'm honored to be back here a
second time I love speaking with you and
look forward to the next time likewise
we'll do it again thank you for
listening to today's episode with Dr
Becky Kennedy I hope you found it to be
as informative and as actionable as I
did right now Dr Becky has a 20%
promotion going for her fantastic online
program on parenting Becky was kind
enough to extend this discount until
this Friday January 17th 2025 for hubman
lab listeners you can find more on that
along with links to Dr Becky's book her
terrific social media handles and more
through the links in our show note
captions if you're learning from and or
enjoying this podcast please subscribe
to our YouTube channel that's a terrific
zeroc cost way to support us please also
subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify
and apple by clicking the follow button
on both Spotify and apple you can also
leave us up to a five-star review please
also check out the sponsors mentioned at
the beginning and throughout today's
episode that's the best way to support
this podcast if you have questions for
me or comments about the podcast or
guests or topics that you'd like me to
include on the hubman Lab podcast please
put those in the comment section on
YouTube if you're not already following
me on social media I am huberman lab on
all social media handles so that's
Instagram X formerly known as Twitter
Facebook threads and Linkedin and on all
those platforms I discuss science and
science related tools some of which
overlaps with the content of the hubman
Lab podcast but much of which is
distinct from the content on the
huberman Lab podcast so again it's
hubman lab on all social media channels
if you haven't already subscribed to our
neural network newsletter our neural
network newsletter is a zeroc cost
monthly newsletter that includes podcast
summaries and what we call protocols in
the form of brief 1 to three page PDFs
that cover things like deliberate heat
exposure deliberate cold exposure how to
optimize your sleep how to optimize your
dopamine we have a foundational Fitness
protocol that covers cardiovascular
training stretching and strength
training again all available at
completely zero cost you simply go to
huberman lab.com go to the menu tab in
the top right corner scroll down to
newsletter and sign up and I should
point out that we do not share your
email with anybody thank you once again
for joining me for today's discussion
with Dr Becky Kennedy I hope you found
it to be as informative and as
actionable as I did and last but
certainly not least thank you for your
interest in science
[Music]