welcome to hubman Labb Essentials where
we revisit past episodes for the most
potent and actionable science-based
tools for mental health physical health
and
performance I'm Andrew huberman and I'm
a professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine today's episode is going to be
all about the science of emotions and
today we're going to talk in particular
about something that most often is
called stress now you might be thinking
wait stress isn't an emotion but stress
really lies at the heart of whether or
not our internal
experience is matched well or not to our
external experience or the events that
are happening to us and around us and as
you'll soon see those converge or
combine to create what we call emotions
I'd like you to come away from today's
episode with what I call an
organizational logic a framework for
think about these things that typically
we just call happy or sad or depressed
or anxious and I'm going to make sure
that you have tools that are grounded in
physiology and Neuroscience that will
allow you to navigate this otherwise
complex space that we call emotions that
will allow you to ground yourself better
when you're feeling like life is
Weighing on you or you're kind of being
pulled by the currents of life as well
as to support other people whether or
not that's in a psychological practice
if you're if you're a practitioner or
you have clients or children or spouses
really to be able to support other
people in your environment better and as
you may recall the nervous system which
includes the brain and the eyes and the
spinal cord but also all the connections
with the organs of the body includes the
brain and body and those organs of the
body your gut and your liver and your
spleen they are also communicating with
the brain so I look forward to a day in
fact when we no longer think about
Neuroscience as just the brain and many
neuroscientists now also think about the
body of course the brain controls the
body but the body is also having a very
profound and concrete influence on the
brain today we're going to talk about
objective tools that match the brain
body experience or separate the brain
body experience in ways that leverage
your ability to lean into life better to
feel better literally to just feel
better about what you're experiencing
and believe it or not to be able to
control your emotions when that's
appropriate okay so what is stress we
hear all the time that stress is bad we
hear people saying they're really
stressed out what is
stress stress at its core is a
generalized system it wasn't designed
for tiger tigers attacking us or people
attacking us it's a system to mobilize
other systems in the brain and body it
wasn't designed for one thing
thing and that gives it a certain
advantage in taking over our the state
of our brain and body but it also gives
you all of us an advantage in
controlling it because it's based on
hardwired biological mechanisms and
there are hardwired biological
mechanisms meaning cells and chemicals
and Pathways and tissues that exist in
you right now that require no
neuroplasticity that allow you to put a
break on stress and so we're going to
talk about those so let's talk about the
stress response and by doing that you
will understand exactly why the tools
I'm going to give you work for those of
you that are saying wait I just want the
tools just give me a summary trust me if
you understand mechanism you are going
to be in a far better position to
incorporate these tools to teach these
tools to others and to modify them as
your life circumstances change let's be
clear about what we already know which
is that
stressors can be
psychological or they can be physical
okay if I put you outside on a cold day
without a jacket for a very long time
that is stressful if I have you prepare
for too many exams at once and you can't
balance it all with your sleep schedule
and your other needs for comfort and
well-being like food rest sleep and
social connection that is stressful so
what happens when the stress response
hits let's talk about the immediate or
what we call the acute stress response
response we could also think of this as
short-term stress so you have a
collection of neurons that start right
about at your neck and run down to about
your navl a little bit lower and those
are called the sympathetic chain ganglia
when something stresses us out either in
our mind or because something enters our
environment that chain of neurons
becomes activated like a bunch of
dominoes falling all at once it's very
fast when those neurons are activated
cocoline is released but there are some
other neurons for the afficionados out
there they're called the postganglionic
neurons those ones respond to that
acetylcholine and then they release
epinephrine which is the equivalent to
Adrenaline so we have this system where
very fast whenever we're stressed the
core of our body these neurons down the
middle of our body release these
chemicals and then there's adrenaline or
epinephrine released at particular
organs and acts in particular ways some
things like the muscles of your legs and
your heart and other things that need to
be active when you're stressed they have
a certain kind of receptor which is
called the beta receptor and that beta
receptor responds to epinephrine and
blood vessels dilate they get bigger and
blood rushes into to our legs the heart
rate speeds up lots of things happen
that get activated and at the same time
that epinephrine activates other
receptors on certain tissues that we
don't need the ones involved in
digestion reproduction and things of
that sort that are
luxuries for when things are going well
not things to pay attention to when
we're stressed so the stress response is
too pronged it's a yes for certain
things and it's a know you may not right
now for other things that's why you feel
blood in certain organs and tissues of
your body but not in others but
basically you are activated in ways that
support you moving and that's because
fundamentally the stress response is
just this generic thing that says do
something you're going to feel agitated
and that's because it was designed to
move you so this is important because if
you want to control stress you need to
learn how to work with that
agitation I'd like to give you a tool at
this point because I think if we go any
further with a lot more science people
are going to uh begin to wonder if this
is just going to be a kind of standard
university lecture sure about the stress
response if you want to reduce the
magnitude of the stress response the
best thing you can do is activate the
other system in the body which is
designed for calming and
relaxation and that system is called the
parasympathetic nervous system and the
parasympathetic nervous system is really
interesting because especially the
cranial nerves the ones that are up in
the brain stem and in the neck area
those have a direct direct line to
various features of your face in
particular the eyes they control things
like eye movements pupil dilation things
of that sort as well as the tongue the
facial muscles Etc so I'm going to teach
you the first tool now so I don't
overwhelm you with all this academic
knowledge without giving you something
useful and the tool that at least to my
knowledge is the fastest and most
thoroughly grounded in physiology and
Neuroscience for calming down in a
self-directed way is What's called the
physiological sigh s g what I'm talking
about when I refer to physiological size
is the very real medical school textbook
relationship between the brain the body
and the body as it relates to the
breathing apparate ey meaning the
diaphragm and lungs and the Heart let's
take the Hallmark of the stress response
the heart starts beating faster blood is
shuttled to the big muscles of the body
to move move you away from whatever it
is this stressor is or just make you
feel like you need to move or talk your
face goes flushed Etc there is however a
way in which you can breathe that
directly controls your heart rate
through the interactions between the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic
nervous system here's how it works when
you inhale so whether or not it's
through the nose or through the mouth
this skeletal muscle that's inside your
body called the diaphragm it moves down
and that's because the lungs expand the
diaphragm moves down your heart actually
gets a little bit bigger in that
expanded space there's more space for
the heart and as a consequence whatever
blood is in there is now at a lower
volume or moving a little bit more
slowly in that larger volume than it was
before you inhaled okay so more space
heart gets bigger blood moves more
slowly and there's a little group of
neurons called the sinoatrial node in
the heart that registers it's pay
believe it or not those neurons pay
attention to the rate of blood flow
through the heart and send a signal up
to the brain that blood is moving more
slowly through the heart the brain then
sends a signal back to the heart to
speed the heart up so what this means is
if you want your heart to beat faster
inhale
longer inhale more
vigorously than your exhales now the
opposite is also true if you want to
slow your heart rate down so stress
response hits you want to slow your
heart rate
down what you want to do is again
capitalize on this relationship between
the body meaning the diaphragm in the
heart and the Brain here's how it works
when you exhale the diaphragm moves up
which makes the heart a little bit
smaller it actually gets a little more
compact blood flows more quickly through
that compact space the sinoatrial node
registers that blood is going more
quickly sends a signal up to the brain
and the parasympathetic nervous system
some neurons in your brain stem send a
signal back to the heart to slow the
heart down so if you want to calm down
quickly you need to make your exhales
longer and or more vigorous than your
inhales now the reason this is so
attractive as a tool for controlling
stress is that it works in real time
this doesn't involve a practice that you
have to go and sit there and do anything
separate from Life the phys ological
sigh is something that people naturally
start doing when they've been crying and
they're trying to recover some air or
calm down when they've been sobbing very
hard or when they are in claustrophobic
environments however the amazing thing
about this thing that we call the
diaphragm the skeletal muscle is that
it's an internal organ that you can
control voluntarily so this incredible
pathway that goes from brain to
diaphragm through What's called the
frenic nerve p h re n i c frenic the
frenic nerve innervates the diap you can
control anytime you want you can double
up your inhales or triple up your
inhales you can exhale more than your
inhales whatever you want to do such an
incredible organ and the physiological
sigh is something that we do
spontaneously but when you're feeling
stressed you can do a double
inhale long exhale now I just told you a
minute ago that if you inhale more than
you exhale you're going to speed the
heart rate up which would promote more
stress and activation now I'm telling
you to do a double inhale exhale in
order to calm down and the reason is the
double inhale exhale which is the
physiological
sigh takes advantage of the fact that
when we do a double inhale even if the
second inhale is sneaking in just a tiny
bit more air because it's kind of hard
to get two deep inhales back to back you
do big deep inhale and then another
little one sneaking it in the little
sacks in your lungs the aoli of the
lungs your lungs aren't just too big
bags but you've got millions of little
sacks throughout the the lungs that
actually make the surface area of your
lungs as big as a tennis court which is
amazing if we were to spread that out
those tend to collapse as we get
stressed and carbon di carbon dioxide
builds up in our bloodstream and that's
one of the reasons we feel agitated as
well but when you do the double inhale
exhale the double inhale reinflates
those little sacks of the lungs and then
when you do the long
exhale that long exhale is now much more
effective at ridding your body and
bloodstream of carbon dioxide which
relaxes you very quickly when you're
feeling stressed the physiological side
done just one to three times so it would
be double inhale exhale double inhale
exhale maybe just two times will bring
down your level of stress very very fast
and as far as I know it's the fastest
way to accomplish that be aware that if
you're going to use the physiological
sigh or exhale emphasize breathing to
calm down that your heart rate will take
about 20 to 30 seconds to come down to
basine and you may need to repeat the
physiological s a few times so let's
think about something now let's think
about stress from not whether or not
it's acute or chronic whether or not
it's good for us or bad for us but on
three different time scales because then
we can arrive at what this is all about
as it relates to emotions but I really
want you to understand the difference
between the three kinds of stress on
three different time scills short-term
medium-term and long-term and what it's
good for and what it's bad for I think
we've all heard that stress is bad for
us we've seen these pictures intended to
frighten us and indeed they are
frightening you see the nice really
plump brain on the left says healthy or
control and then you see the brain that
says stressed above it on the right and
it's like withed or we see that the
hippocampus an area involved in memory
is smaller people that are stressed I
think we've all heard now so many times
that stress is bad but in that
conversation unfortunately it's a lipsed
some of the really positive things that
stress does for us in the short term
when the stress response hits that is
good for your immune system I know that
might be a tough pill to swallow but
it's absolutely true in
fact stress often comes in the form of
bacterial or viral infection and the
stress response is in part organized to
combat bacterial and viral infection so
short-term stress and the release of
adrenaline in particular or epinephrine
same thing adrenaline epinephrine is
good for combating
infection and this to me is just not
discussed enough so that's why I'm
discussing it here and it relates to a
particular tool that many of you ask
about but I don't often get the
opportunity to talk about in such an
appropriate context it's not that it's
ever inappropriate to talk about but
what I'm about to talk about now is the
use of again respiration breathing to
somewhat artificially activate the
stress response and that will accomplish
two things okay I'll return to medium
and long-term stress but I want to say
short-term stress is good because the
dilation of the pupils the changes in
the Optics of the eyes the quickening of
the heart rate the sharpening of your
cognition and in fact that short-term
stress brings certain elements of the
brain online that allow you to focus now
it Narrows your focus you're not good at
seeing the so-called big picture but it
Narrows your focus because it allows you
to do these what I call duration path
outcome types of analysis it allows you
to evaluate your environment evaluate
what you need to do it primes your whole
system for better cognition it primes
your immune system to combat infection
and that all makes sense when you think
about the fact that famine
thirst bacterial infections viral
infections Invaders all of this stuff
liberates a response in the body that's
designed to get you to fight back about
against whatever stressor that happens
to be psychological physical bacterial
viral again the stress response is
generic the
tool takes advantage of the fact that
when adrenaline is released in the body
from the adrenals it has the effect of
also liberating a lot of these killer
cells from the immune organs in
particular from the spleen but from
elsewhere as well and interactions with
the lymphatic system that combat
infection
the way this works in the real world is
best captured by a study that can be
mapped back to so called Wim Hoff
breathing now Wim Hoff breathing is so
named after the so-called Iceman Wim
Hoff there are two components to a sort
of breathing protocol that he
developed that was based also on what's
called Tumo breathing TMO so before whim
there was Tumo breathing and many people
call this now super oxygenation
breathing so it's deliberate
hyperventilation why would somebody want
to do this well deliberate
hyperventilation done for maybe 25
Cycles so inhale exhale inhale exhale
inhale exhale that pattern of breathing
rapid movements of the
diaphragm will liberate adrenaline from
the adrenals when adrenaline is released
in the body you are in a better position
to combat infections and so whether or
not you breathe very quickly in these
cycles of 25 breaths and regardless of
what you call it doesn't matter
adrenaline is released if you take a
cold shower adrenaline is released if
you go into an ice bath deliberately and
even if you do it non- deliberately
adrenaline is released you are mimicking
the stress response and that
adrenaline serves to suppress or combat
incoming infections and this was
beautifully shown in a study that was
published in a very fine journal the
proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences for the US it's it literally
called proceedings of the naal Academy
USA to distinguish it from other
proceedings of other National academies
in other
countries the way the experiment went is
that people were injected with
endotoxin or in some cases they were
injected with with a bacterial wall that
mimics infection it g it gives you a
fever it makes you feel nauseous it
makes you feel sick it is not pleasant
half of the people did a particular
pattern of breathing that looked very
much like the pattern of breathing I
described a moment ago of doing 25 deep
inhales and exhales followed by an
exhale holding their breath then
repeating 25 inhales exhales holding
their breath so this would look
something like this or if you're
listening it sounds
like 25 30 times you'll start feeling
heated up you'll start feeling the
adrenaline response you're liberating
adrenaline in your body then exhale hold
your breath for 15 seconds and then
repeat now I want to emphasize never
ever ever do this anywhere near water
people have passed out so-called shallow
water bra out people have died please
don't do it at all unless you get
clearance to do it from your doctor
because there are some pulmonary effects
and whatnot and the breath holds should
definitely not be done by anyone that
has glaucoma or pressure uh you know
concerns for the eyes but these
repeated cycles of breathing that
liberate adrenaline allowed the group
that did that protocol to essentially
experience zero symptoms from the
injection of this ecoli which is
remarkable they had much reduced or no
symptoms they didn't feel feverish they
didn't feel sick they weren't vomiting
no diarrhea which is remarkable but
makes total sense when you think about
the fact that the short-term stress
response that what's typically called
the acute stress response is designed to
combat all
stressors many of us are familiar with
the experience of work work work work
work or taking care of a loved one or
stress stress stress stress stress then
we finally relax maybe we even go on
vacation like oh now I'm finally going
to get the break and then we get sick
and that's because the adrenaline
response crashed and your immune system
crashed with it so please understand
this now many of you might say well how
long is it 2 hours is it 3 hours a lot
of you out there that really like
specificity it will vary for everybody I
would just kind of use a rule of thumb
when you are no longer able to achieve
good sleep what good sleep means to you
please see the episodes on sleep if you
want more about tools to sleep when you
are no longer able to achieve good sleep
you are now moving from acute stress to
chronic stress you need to be able to
turn the stress response off okay so now
let's talk about medium-term stress
medium-term stress is going to be stress
that lasts anywhere from several days to
several weeks what is stress threshold
well stress threshold is actually our
ability to cognitively regulate what's
going on in our body a lot of stress
inoculation a lot of managing
medium-term stress on the on the time
scale of weeks or maybe even a couple
months so we're not talking about years
of
stress a lot of that has to do with
raising our stress threshold it's about
capacity and there are very simple tools
excellent tools that will allow us to
modulate our capacity for stress and
they look a lot like the tools I just
described they involve placing oneself
deliberately into a situation where our
adrenaline is increased somewhat not to
the extreme
and then when we are feel flooded with
adrenaline and normally we would Panic
it's about cognitively mentally
emotionally calming ourselves and being
comfortable with that response in our
body and what would this look like you
can use the cyclic hyper oxygenation
breathing to combat infection if you're
feeling kind of run down and there is
also a way in which you can use things
like cold showers or if you exercise and
you bring your heart rate up very high
you kind of go into that high intensity
realm where your heart is beating a
little bit harder than you're
comfortable with the key in those
moments is to learn to relax the mind
while the body is very activated one way
that you can do this and this is kind of
fun if it's approved by your physician
and you're able to do this you can bring
your heart rate up you could do this
through an ice bath if that's your thing
or a cold shower or cyclic oxygenation
breathing or you could Sprint or you
could go hard on the bike whatever is
that brings your heart rate up and then
what you want to do is you want to
actually try and calm the mind while
your body is in this heightened state of
activation when we are stressed our
pupils dilate the effect of that pupil
dilation is to create tunnel vision it
literally Narrows our view of the visual
world we no longer see in Panorama and
there's some other effects as well but
that's because the visual system through
this cranial nerve system that I
described before is Tethered and is part
of this autonomic nervous system
by deliberately dilating your gaze
meaning not moving your head and eyes
around but by deliberately going from
tunnel vision to broader panoramic
Vision literally seeing more of your
environment all at once it creates a
calming effect on the mind because it
releases a particular circuit in the
brain stem that's associated with
alertness AKA stress now this is very
powerful if you're running for instance
and you're at Max Capacity you're close
to it or you're kind of hitting like 80
90% of maximum on the bike and you
dilate your gaze what you'll find is the
mind can relax while the body is in full
output and this is um relates to work
that in various communities people are
are working with this in the sports
Community military communities Etc but
it's a form not really of stress
inoculation it's more about raising
stress threshold so that the body is
going to continue to be in a high
alertness high reactivity mode high
output but the mind is calm and so this
isn't about you unifying mind and body
this is actually about using body to
bring up your level of activation then
dissociating not the clinical
dissociation kind of disorders but
dissociating the mental or emotional
response from what's going on in your
body and over time so if you do this you
know a couple times you don't have to do
this every workout but if you do this
every maybe once a week or so you start
being comfortable at these higher
activation States what once felt
overwhelming and like a lot of work now
is manageable it feels tolerable so
that's for navigating medium-term stress
and then there's long-term stress now
long-term stress is bad you do not want
adrenaline up in your system for a very
long time in fact you you ideally you
would have your stress go up various
times throughout the day but it would
never stay elevated and it would never
prevent you from getting a good night's
sleep we know that chronic stress
elevated stress and especially in the
so-called type A personalities
creates heart disease leading killer of
for in most every country but in
particular in the US but by no means do
you want to be stressed out all the time
chronically for months and months and
months and years on
end the best tools the best mechanisms
that we know to modulate long-term
stress might surprise you a little
bit first of all there are going to be
the things that don't surprise you which
is everyone knows getting regular
exercise getting good sleep um using
realtime tools to try and Tamp down the
stress response Etc that's all going to
be really
useful the data really point to the fact
that social connection and certain types
of social Connection in particular are
what are going to mitigate or reduce
long-term stress and this is a
particularly important issue nowadays
where we have all these proxies or
surrogates for social connection you
know online and texting with people a
lot everyone has this kind of need to
stay connected to one another humans are
incredibly social creatures the way to
think about social connection and how it
can mitigate some of the long-term
effects of stress is really through the
systems of neuromodulation like
serotonin serotonin again is a
neuromodulator neuromodulators are a
little bit like playist in the brain
they tend to amplify or bias the
likelihood that certain brain circuits
and body circuits are going to be
activated and that others will not
serotonin generally gives us feelings of
well-being at very high levels it makes
us feel blissed and it tends to make us
feel like we have enough in our
immediate environment when we see
somebody that we recognize and Trust
serotonin is released in the brain and
that has certain positive effects on the
immune system and on other systems of
neural repair and and synapses and
things that really reinforce Connections
in the brain and prevent that long-term
withering of connections so serot on is
tied to social connection now social
connection can take many forms some of
those can be romantic attachments those
could be familial attachments that are
non-romantic friendship pets even
attachments to things that just Delight
us having a sense of delight a sense of
really enjoying something that you see
and engage in witness or participate in
that is associated with the serotonin
system and certainly play is one of
those things social connection of
various forms those are things to invest
in I'll be the first to admit social
connection and friendship and
relationships of all kinds to animals or
humans or inanimate objects takes work
it takes investment it takes time in not
needing everything to be exactly the way
you want it to be social connection is
something that we work for but it is
incredibly powerful finding just a few
people even one or an animal or
something that you Delight in believe it
or not has very positive effects on
mitigating this long-term stress on
improving various aspects of our life as
it relates to stress and emotionality
now how do you know if you're making
serotonin you don't know in the moment
but you can learn if you pay attention
to kind of recognize these feelings of
comfort trust Bliss delight and those
are not weak terms those are not
associated just with uh psychological
terms they are they are every bit as
physiological as the movement of your
muscles or the secretion of adrenaline
now there are a plethora of things that
will also impact well-being and allow
you to mod modulate your long-term
stress reduce the likelihood that you'll
engage in long-term stress there are
compounds that are not prescription
compounds that can modulate the stress
system and sometimes because of the way
that life is we just don't have the
opportunity to control life and to
control our response to stress the three
I want to focus on and one that I think
you need to be cautious about that I've
mentioned before include
ashwagandha eleanine and melatonin let's
talk about melatonin first melatonin is
a hormone secreted from the pineal in
direct relationship to how much Darkness
you are in not emotional Darkness but
light suppresses melatonin melatonin
helps you fall asleep it doesn't help
you stay asleep I personally do not
recommend supplementing melatonin
because it's supplemented typically at
very high levels you know 1 to 3
milligrams or even more that is an
outrageous iously high doses also has a
number of potentially negative effects
on the reproductive axis and and
hormones there the other is Aline I've
talked about Aline which provided it's
safe for you can be taken 100 milligrams
or 200 milligrams about a 30 minutes or
60 minutes before sleep it can enhance
the transition to sleep and depth of
sleep for many people it increases Gaba
this inhibitory neurotransmitter in the
brain it tends to turn off our forbrain
a little bit or reduce the activity of
our kind of thinking systems and
ruminating systems help people fall
asleep but theanine has also been shown
for people that are chronically anxious
or chronically stressed to significantly
increase relaxation it is known to have
a minor effect on anxiety but eight
Studies have shown that it definitely
has a notable effect on stress the other
supplement that can be very useful is
ashwagandha ashwagandha is known to
lower anxiety and cortisol this is great
I mean the opportunity for me anyway to
be able to take something that can help
me reduce my cortisol so that I don't
get some of the long-term effects of
stress and I'm not going to take
ashwaganda year round I would only do
this if I was feeling like I wasn't
managing my short and medium-term stress
well so I don't take it on a regular
basis I do take it when I'm in these
times when things are particularly
stressful so social connection and some
supplementation of course diet exercise
sleep for long-term stress so I hope
today you were able to take a slightly
different view of this thing that we
call stress not just see it as evil but
see it as power powerful and useful in
certain contexts great for us in certain
contexts and problematic in other
contexts and as well to think about the
various tools that I've presented that
can allow you to adjust and modulate
your internal levels of alertness or
calmness so that you can lean more
effectively into life which includes
sleep and social connection and the work
you have to do and of course
acknowledges that the events in the
world are beyond our control what's in
our control is how we react to them
something that's ly said in the wellness
and self-help and psychology world but
for which there often aren't as many
concrete tools that we can really look
to and Trust in real time as always
really appreciate your time and
attention today I hope you practice some
of the tools if they're right for you I
hope you think hard about stress and how
you can control your stress and above
all as always thank you for your
interest in science
[Music]