welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford school of
medicine today my guest is Dr David
Linden Dr David Linden is a professor of
neuroscience at John's Hopkins school of
medicine his laboratory has studied
neuroplasticity that is how Connections
in the Brain Change in response to
experience much of that work focused on
a structure called the cerebellum which
is also sometimes referred to as the
mini brain because it looks like a mini
brain in the bottom and back of the
human brain and it's responsible for an
enormous number of basic functions that
we use in everyday life including our
motor behavior that is our ability to
walk and talk but also dance play
instruments and it's responsible for an
enormous number of basic functions that
we use in everyday life including our
sense of balance our ability to learn
new motor behaviors as well as our sense
of timing today we will discuss the
cerebellum and what it does but Dr David
Lindon will also teach us about the
important sense of touch as well as what
makes us different as individuals the
reason today's discussion encompasses so
many important topics is that Dr David
lindon's laboratory has focused on many
of those topics and he is also the
author of five excellent popular books
about Neuroscience that focus on for
instance our sense of pleasure and where
it originates from and what controls it
in the brain as well as our sense of
touch and today we start off our
discussion by talking about the recent
discovery of a set of neurons that have
been known about for a long period of
time but that only recently have been
characterized that are involved in
sensual touch in particular and it's a
fascinating conversation I assure you in
addition to that Dr David lynon informs
us about what makes us individuals how
each and every one of us perceives the
same things differently and it's an
absolutely fascinating conversation
which tells you for instance why some of
you think a smell is putrid indeed
smells like vomit whereas others perhaps
are not bothered by that smell and why
others still are attracted to that smell
or something that you look at or
something that you hear we also talk
about nature versus nurture and how we
come to be who we are not just through
our genes and epigenetics but also
through our early childhood experience
and adult experience and then in the
latter third of our conversation we
shift to talking about the so-called
mindbody connection and the science
underlying how our thoughts inform our
bodily health or lack thereof as well as
how the organs of our body control the
chemicals hormones and thoughts within
our brain then we shift to discussing Dr
David lynon himself and the fact that in
2020 he was diagnosed with a form of
heart cancer that led his Physicians to
tell him that he had 6 to 12 months to
live now obviously because he was in our
studio to record this conversation he
has outlived that prognos nois but he
lives dayto day with the knowledge that
his death may very well come soon
although it isn't clear exactly when
that day will come of course he tells us
how the initial prognosis of his cancer
as well as outliving that prognosis has
informed his day-to-day life as well as
his thinking and his relationships and
that leads to a very direct and frankly
emotional conversation that includes
advice on how all of us can get the most
out of our daily living and out of our
overall life it's an extremely powerful
conversation that I believe everyone
regardless of age or health status can
benefit from and it's one that makes
clear that not only is Dr David Lindon a
spectacular scientist but also a
spectacular educator a spectacular
popular writer a spectacular Family Man
including husband and father and friend
to many people and his colleagues but he
is also a courageous and spectacularly
generous human being before we begin I'd
like to emphasize that this podcast is
separate from my teaching and research
roles at Stanford it is however part of
my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to Consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is Roka Roa
makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are
of the absolute highest quality the
company was founded by two All-American
swimmers from Stanford and everything
about Roa eyeglasses and sunglasses were
designed with performance in mind now
I've spent a lifetime working on the
biology of the visual system and I can
tell you that your visual system has to
contend with an enormous number of
challenges in order for you to be able
to see clearly Roa understands those
challenges and the biology the visual
system such that they've designed
sunglasses and Eyeglasses that always
allow you to see with Crystal clarity
now initially Roa ey glasses and
sunglasses were designed for sports
performance and as a consequence all of
their glasses are designed to be very
lightweight and to not slip off your
face if you get sweaty however the
design of the glasses incl includ some
that are specifically for sport and
others whose aesthetic really allows you
to use them for sport as well as out to
dinner or to work etc and that's how I
use them if you'd like to try Roa
eyeglasses and sunglasses you can go to
roka.com that's r.com and enter the code
huberman to save 20% off your first
order again that's Roa r.com and enter
the code huberman at checkout today's
episode is also brought To Us by levels
levels is a program that lets you see
how different foods and behaviors affect
your health by giving you real time
feedback on your diet using a continuous
glucose monitor one of the most
important factors impacting your
immediate and long-term health is the
way that your body manages its blood
glucose or sometimes referred to as
blood sugar levels to maintain energy
and focus throughout the day you want to
keep your blood glucose steady without
big spikes or dips using levels you can
monitor how different types of foods and
different food combinations as well as
food timing and things like exercise
combined to impact your blood glucose
levels I started using levels a little
over a year ago and it gave me a lot of
insight into how specific Foods were
spiking my blood sugar and then leaving
me feeling tired for several hours
afterwards as well as how the spacing of
exercise and my meals was impacting my
overall energy and in doing so it really
allowed me to optimize how I eat what I
eat when I exercise and so on such that
my blood glucose levels and energy
levels are stable throughout the day if
you're interested in learning more about
levels and trying a continuous glucose
monitor yourself go to levels. l/
huberman right now levels is offering an
additional two free months of membership
again that's levels. linkl nk/ huberman
to get two free months of membership we
are always striving to make the hubman
Lab podcast better and to that end we
need your help over the next month we
are going to be carrying out a survey
the purpose of the survey is to improve
the hubman Lab podcast according to your
feedback we put together a brief survey
to understand what you love about the
podcast hopefully you love a few things
at least or maybe just one thing
as well as what you think could be
improved or perhaps the many things that
you think could be improved about the
hubman Lab podcast basically what we are
asking is to get your feedback so that
we can improve any and all things about
the huberman Lab podcast the survey does
not take long and every single response
will be reviewed as a thank you for
completing the survey we are offering
two months free of the hubman lab
premium channel if you're already a
member of the Hub lab premium channel do
not worry you will get an additional two
free months for carrying out this survey
you can find the link to the survey in
the show notes for this podcast episode
and on our website huberman lab.com so
if you would be so kind as to take a few
minutes to fill out the survey and help
us continue with bringing you the best
possible content here at The hubman Lab
podcast and as always thank you for your
interest in science and now for my
discussion with Dr David Lynden
Professor Lyndon welcome thanks so much
for having me been looking forward to
our conversation and we have a lot to
talk about we do lots of different
aspects of science lots of different
aspects of personal journey and what
you're confronting
now as it relates to your health and
your
future I want to start off with a
question that I learned from the one and
only the great Carl daero who was the
first guest on this podcast my colleague
at Stanford and for those of you that
don't recognize Carl's name he is a
absolute Phenom he's is a uh active
clinical psych psychiatrist so he's an
MD and he also is um a bioengineer who's
developed a lot of the modern tools for
probing the brain and um anytime I've
met with Carl the first thing he says is
what do you most excited about lately
that's a good question it is uh so I'm
going to steal that approach and say
what are you most excited about lately
well very very lately the most
interesting thing that that I read in
Neuroscience is the answer
to a uh a scientific problem that I
think is really dear to a lot of
people's hearts and that
is what are the nerve endings in the
genitals that are responsible for sexual
sensation and you know if you think
about it right people can feel sexy from
being touched on lots of different parts
of the body but there's something
special about the genitals doesn't
matter male or female or interex or gay
or straight or by or whatever you are
you know the genitals are are a hot spot
and why and you you'd think as
biologists we' know this by now this
would be something we could just answer
but but it's been a mystery for a long
time and if if you go back to to
1860 there was a German neuroanatomist
named Krauss and he cut thin sections of
tissue from the penis and the clitoris
and he looked at them under the
microscope and he saw a particular kind
of nerve ending there that has since
been called The Krauss cor pusle and
there were lots of them in these two
places and so he thought well maybe this
is the cellular basis of sexual
sensation maybe these are the particular
nerve endings that are
responsible uh for this um but there
were some things that that were in favor
of that and some not so these nerve
endings are also in some other places
that people can
find more or less sexy like they're in
the nipples and they're in the lips and
they're in the anus all places that get
popular in uh in that domain but they're
also in places like the cornea or the
lining of the joints so the distribution
doesn't quite make
sense and so it was never known and so
in if you wanted to really test as a
scientist whether these nerve endings
are responsible you want to record their
electrical signals while the genitals
are being touched you'd want to
inactivate these cells and see if you
could interfere with with uh sexual
sensation and this in a preprint from
David ginty's group at Harvard is just
what they have been able to do in mice
they found a way to label and record
from and activate and inactivate
artificially
uh The Krauss cor pusles and so you see
a nerve ending in the skin it could be
conveying all kinds of information it
could be tuned for hot or for cold or
for itch or for pain or for or for
inflammation or for mechanical sensation
stretching uh vibration
indentation and sure enough when they
recorded from these Krauss cor pusles
they really are uh mechanical sensors as
you would expect uh if if they were
involved in sexual sensation so that was
good and then uh the other thing then
that they did is they they tried to
artificially turn them on and so the way
they did that is they Ed genetic tricks
to express one of Carl
Dao's uh uh molecule that activates
neurons when they're when blue light is
shown on them and they found that if
they express uh uh this artificial
protein in the crow cells in a in a male
Mouse and then shine blue light the
mouse gets an erection all right so far
so good what happens if you turn them
off well if you turn them off in a male
Mouse it's just as interested in females
when they're in heat but it won't mount
and thrust and ejaculate as much and if
you turn them off in a female Mouse
during the time of her cycle where she
would normally be sexually receptive uh
you find that she is less interested
she's much less likely to let him Mount
she's much less likely to let him finish
so this is the
remarkable result that uh finally after
all these years since 1860 now we know
what the nerve endings are that convey
sexual sensation and like all good
science then you know there are a lot of
questions that are really interesting to
our everyday lives like you know people
like different things in bed and have
different propensity for orgasm or or
like like to be touched in different
ways well is part of that reason because
of individual variation in their cruss
cor pusle structure um we know that
sexual sensation diminishes with aging
is that in part because kuss cor pussle
density is lost from the skin of the
genitals and that's a reasonable because
we know for example that fine touch
sensors in the
fingertips uh so-called Merkel and
Meisner endings also named after German
anatomist like so many things are uh are
also lost with age so that's a
reasonable idea so so this finding from
ginty's Lab has opened up a whole world
of science and I've been my my own lab
doesn't work on touch but I've been a
fanboy of touch for for many many years
mostly because where I work at Johns
Hopkins Medical School there have been
many terrific touch researchers it's
been a world center for it and I hear
about it over lunch and I got all fired
up so years ago I wrote a book about it
and I still follow the field and this is
the most interesting thing in that field
recently and as I recall ginty was your
neighbor at Hopkins before he moved to
Harvard that's right that's right he was
one of the ones ginty uh uh Steven sha
uh Michael Katarina Shin Jong dong there
have been a number number of world
leaders in the in the cellular basis of
touch sensation at Hopkins do you recall
if in the preprint that you were
describing there was an experiment where
they activated these Krauss Cor pusles
in females it's funny you should mention
that I sent that exact email to David
giny and they said they are in the
process of doing that right now and they
don't quite know yet and so I asked him
I said so for example is erection of the
clitoris even a thing in mice he says
well we're really not sure so we're
activating the CR core pusles in female
mice and we're just kind of staring at
it and looking and see if anything
happens does there you know does the you
know does the the body change shape is
there a color change they don't even
quite know what it is they're looking
for because it's that much on the
Leading Edge of things but it's a good
question yeah or perhaps the female mice
would be more willing to mate outside of
the usual time frame of receptivity if
uh these kuss cor pusles are are
stimulated that's possible my suggestion
my my guess would be not because I think
that the hormonal regulation of
receptivity is like a sledgehammer and
very hard to overcome but they might be
more willing to continue mating or mate
for longer during their uh fertile time
and I just want to remind people because
we had a a guest recently uh Dr Reena
Malik um who's a urologist reproductive
and sexual health expert she's an MD and
um uh she made clear that the the
clitoris and the penis come from the
same embryonic origin they are analogous
tissues um in um different
individuals I do have one more question
about this uh sexual touch thing
um these are periperal nerves right so
these are not of the brain and spinal
cord they are in what we call the
periphery
and my understanding is that peripheral
neurons regenerate and can remodel
themselves extensively in ways that um
neurons within the brain and spinal cord
um tend to remodel less especially as
one gets older out of the so-called
critical period um is it possible that
these CR corpuscules and their patterns
of innervation within the genitals
change according to the stimulation that
uh people experience um in other words
is sexual sensation experience
dependent that is a great question and
so we don't know
because monitoring this in people is not
technically possible Right it requires
cadaa tissue so you can only do it once
in animals it it it it will be possible
and it it could be for a couple of
different reasons in other words it
could be I think what you're imagining
is that there's actual structural
plasticity if you looked at these kuss
cor pusles or uh that you would actually
see them changing their shape or their
size or their or their density as a
result of experience but uh what can
also happen is a phenomena like
desensitization uh that is to say when
there's stimulation for a long time then
uh The receptors transiently can become
less sensitive to touch and it's well
known uh particularly in males that uh
that chronic masturbation can produce
desensitization of sexual sensation in
the penis and that could be as a result
of a physical change a morphological
change in the CR cor pusles uh but it's
more likely to be a change in their
function that you wouldn't be able to
Simply see by looking uh at an outline
of structure in the
microscope such an interesting topic
Thanks for opening things up with with
that and I'll have to check out this
preprint I'm also a huge fan of David
ginty's work and and colleagues there
are many people involved in uh that
domain of work of
course I'd like to talk about your
recent book and the sort of underlying
basis of what led you to write it and
what intrigued you about this idea of
human individuality the book unique uh
is one that we'll provide a link to in
the show note captions and um it's a
very interesting idea that we are all
different um especially coming from a
neuroscientist who we were trained at
least similarly to learn that sure the
bumps and ripples of the brain and the
fine wiring of the brain um is different
and we are all unique and different we
have different shapes AKA morphologies
but focusing on human individuality is
not something that modern Neuroscience
or classic neur science has really done
much of it's really focused on how
people do X or people do y this way um
tell us about unique and tell us about
human
individuality yeah well I mean you're
absolutely right so when I look at the
experiments in my own lab how do we do
them well we work on mice do we work on
mice with genetic variation no we work
on highly inbred mice that are designed
to be as genetically similar to each
other as possible
and then we raise them basically in
prison in little little cells which may
not be a good idea and we try to give
them as similar experience as possible
they are given toys and food and water
but I agree it it resembles um a prison
of sorts they aren't free to roam they
they're they have nothing like the
experience of a wild mouse let me put it
that way they're uh uh and and yes there
are as you said correctly there are
plenty of experiments where there is
enrichment uh for mice and and they love
it so for example in our lab when we put
running wheels in the cages or mice and
let them run overnight they're active at
night um your average Mouse will run 2
kilometers in a night for a little tiny
Mouse and some of the mice are so
intense they will run 20 kilomet imagine
a mouse doing 20K but but it will happen
they really really like it they don't
like being in prison they they want to
exercise uh and they're really Bor
so yes to get back to your general Point
uh so much of science is designed to try
to find general
principles
of of function of the brain a physiology
of genetics uh and to ignore individual
variation but individual variation is so
important to our human experience and
actually is so important to to the
process of evolution in natural elction
and how how species uh make their way in
the world that that it's it's something
that that requires a lot of attention
and to me what's really
fascinating is that when you look at the
variation in the way sense organs
function it's almost a miracle that we
can agree on a common reality
at all even within the human species and
this is true of of more of of of some
senses more than others obviously in
your world in the retina we have various
kinds of of loss of color vision uh that
are well known and some other more
complicated phenomena having to do with
uh impairments in the perception of
motion uh or form but uh the place where
this really happens is in the uh ola
system so we have approximately 400
functional receptors for different
odorant molecule smells uh in our nose
and if you uh sequence the genomes of
many people you find that the uh that
the the DNA that encodes for these
odorant receptors is
unusually variable from Individual to
individual as a matter of fact if you
take two different people on average
they will have functional differences in
30% of their odor
receptors and if you do as Lesley vosol
and her colleagues did at Rockefeller
University and give odor tests where
they give people different things to
smell and then they dilute them and find
the Threshold at which they can detect
them you find enormous changes
from People to People both in term in
general terms some people are just
better smellers than others but in terms
of individual odors as well there's some
odors that some people can't detect and
other people smell one way for example
there is a uh there's a secreted hormone
called
androne androne there are some people
who can't smell it at
all for some people uh it smells like
rather Pleasant like grass and for some
people it smells foul like urine or
sweat and it just depends on genetic
variation in one particular odorant
receptor sorry to interrupt uh another
uh phenomenal researcher who studies ol
faction among other things Katherine dck
um I once heard uh say that some people
have a gene that for them makes the
smell of microwave popcorn um um they
experience that smell as vomit and other
people who lack this Gene like the smell
of microwave popcorn or at least for
them it's not aversive so it can really
be a binary response well it can and
actually that's a very particular funny
case so the the relevant chemical there
is buic acid and also isovic acid and so
uh there are uh researchers I think
Rachel Herz
uh is one of them who have given a
mixture of these two chemicals to people
and if they say this is parmesan cheese
they go oh yeah that's parmesan cheese
and if they give it to other people and
say this is vomit they'll go oh yeah
that's vomit and if they tell people
they give them one vial and say this is
peran shees and they go yeah and they
give them another one they say it's vom
they go yeah and then they say well
actually we fooled you it was the same
vial they say no you didn't you must
have made a mistake they're convinced
that they couldn't have been the same
thing so this points out not only is
there genetic
variation that uh is responsible
individuals perceive odor but we are
incredibly
suggestible in terms of odors and we we
are very dependent upon them in terms of
cultural
context uh and and this can be this can
be learned and and this is Central to
our Humanity in the sense that that we
humans are what I like to call the anti-
pandas uh pandas live in one spot uh in
in southern China and they eat one thing
bamboo and that's it humans are the
opposite humans can live in any
ecological niche in the world from the
tropics to the poles and humans eat a
wide wide wide variety of foods and as a
result it means that we have have to
have a very plastic old factory system
there have to be very few things that we
find
innately aversive there are only a
handful of odors rotting meat odors uh
molecules with the evocative names like
cadaverine and putene are things that
even babies when they're newborn find
aversive but other things happen that
they need to be learned for example um
pretty much every adult finds poop odors
uh unpleasant but babies Happ happily
play with their own poop they have to
learn that that's disgusting it's not
because babies have a different nose
it's because they have to learn
culturally it's not innate it is not
innate um they're only a few innate odor
aversions and a few innate taste
aversions that were were born with and
the other things are elaborated
culturally and we can think about this
in terms of how we we we we talk about
odors so for example we might say
vanilla smells
sweet well that's weird that's like
those are two different senses how can
something smell sweet that's like saying
it sounds red right it's it's a
statement about synesthesia right and
but but how did it come to pass and do
people say that vanilla smells sweet
everywhere in the world well the answer
is no so in places in the world where
vanilla is used with sugar in in sweet
foods like desserts then people say that
vanilla smells sweet or mint similarly
uh smells sweet if it is typically used
together with sugar but if you go to a
place like uh uh like Vietnam where mint
is mostly used in Savory dishes people
won't say that mint smells sweet so
there's a pair dissociation there that
at least at our level of conscious
understanding feeds back onto what we
call old factory or smell perception but
really it's a it must be a pair
dissociation at some point in
development yeah it is it absolutely is
a pair Association and it's something
that goes on continually through your
life right I mean lots of people for
example uh have stories of foods that
they wouldn't eat as a child but they
came to like as an adults um a good
example of that is coffee uh a lot of
people have to overcome bitter aversion
to uh to become coffee
aicad uh so uh you know this this this
feeds into the more the more General
theme
that there is no pure perception
perception is inference it's not like
there is a
purely objective world that can somehow
make its way through the senses and we
can perceive that as the truth all of
our perception through all of our senses
both the outward pointing senses of the
world like smell and taste and sight and
hearing uh and the inward pointing
senses like balance and uh is my stomach
full uh and things like that all of them
are based on experience and expectation
and the situation of the moment as many
of you know I've been taking ag1 daily
since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're
sponsoring the podcast ag1 is a vitamin
mineral probiotic drink that's designed
to meet all of your foundational
nutrition needs now of course I try to
get enough servings of vitamins and
minerals through whole food sources that
include vegetables and fruits every day
but often times I simply can't get
enough servings but with ag1 I'm sure to
get enough vitamins and minerals and the
probiotics that I need and it also
contains adaptogens to help buffer
stress simply put I always feel better
when I take ag1 I have more focus and
energy and I sleep better and it also
happens to taste great for all these
reasons whenever I'm asked if you could
take Just One supplement what would it
be I answer ag1 if you'd like to try ag1
go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a
special offer they'll give you five free
travel packs plus a year supply of
vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com
huberman are there any examples of
uniqueness of visual perception that
come to mind I recently did a social
media post um that involved it was
essentially three rings A blue
ring um a red ring and a blue ring in
the center perhaps it was the other way
around excuse me it was red blue red and
um I asked which ring is in front or are
they all at the in the same plane now of
course it's a two-dimensional image
right um and interestingly it splits out
into about thirds some people see the
blue ring in front quite a bit others
see a red ring out in front others see
them all in the same plane and this uh
we think has to do with um differences
in two things between individuals one is
the distribution of the cone photo
receptors um which we know is
essentially random between individuals
maybe even between the two eyes and then
um and that gives rise to this
phenomenon of chromatic aberration yes
um which is the displacement of the
visual image according to the wavelength
of the light and we won't get into the
physics of it now I'll soon do a post
that hopefully distills it in a manner
that simple enough that people
understand but clearly some people see
certain colors in front of others MH um
and the person right next to them could
see the opposite color in front and
others say what are you talking about
all the colors are in exactly the same
plane of of vision um so that's the one
that I know um I'm guessing you know
some others and perhaps some more robust
ones well I think you know
perhaps this is maybe not what you had
in mind but one way in which experience
modifies the visual world has to do with
how much light you're exposed to in the
first five years or so of your life and
so kids that don't get outside are much
more likely to be
myopic and it actually ised near
yes uh uh when they grow up uh than kids
who got outside and we now know that at
least part of the story is that light
seems to
stimulate the um expression of a class
of molecules called trophic factors that
you're well acquainted with that
actually change the shape of the eyeball
so it's not really the structure of the
retina or the lens of the cornea the
actual degree of elongation of the
eyeball changes
changing the way the the retina sits
relative to the lens and that seems to
be light dependent early in life and uh
which gives rise to uh uh to uh a higher
incidence of myopia and and to me this
is really well first of all it's it's
it's news you can use you should get
your kids outside absolutely all kinds
of reasons and you should get outside
too especially in the morning set that
circadian rhythm I I know that's a
famous huberman esque uh uh uh point
they're gonna be putting me in the grave
David and I'm going to be telling people
to uh or it'll maybe it'll be on my
Tombstone he'll say get get sunlight in
your eyes especially especially on
cloudy days because there is still
sunlight even if you can't see the
physical object of the sun on cloudy
days well you know I think this whole
idea
of having traits that are dependent upon
early life experience is fascinating
because there are a number of situations
where you would guess that something is
genetic but it isn't it's actually
dependent on early life experience and
there's a there's an amazing story about
this having to do with the early days of
World War II so in the early days of
World War II the Japanese Army just
swept through Asia they defeated the the
British and Malaysia and Singapore they
over in Thailand and Burma and they
knocking on the gates of India and
everything was going great except the
Japanese Army had a problem there were
an enormous number of their soldiers who
became incapacitated with heat stroke
they got their core temperature got too
hot and uh when the Army
doctors uh examine them they found this
was much more likely to happen in
solders uh who came from the northern
part of Japan Hokkaido where it's uh
where it snows in the winter as opposed
to the southern part of Japan like kushu
which is a
semi-tropical environment and the
classical explanation the biologists
like us would guess would say oh all
right well this has happened genetically
over many years uh you have a family
that's been in kushu for many
generations and you've selected four
Gene variants to allow you to tolerate
the heat better and we know actually
what this is so if you're more heat
tolerant it's because you have more of a
particular class of sweat gland called
the echine sweat glands the sort of
saltwater sweat glands not the lipid
stinky armpit sweat glands called the
arrine ones the acine ones you have a
higher fraction of them that are
inovated meaning that the signals from
your brain that say your core is too hot
can then make you sweat so the total
density of sweat glands between northern
and southern soldiers in Japan wasn't
different
but the southern soldiers tend to have a
higher degree of intervation all right
so they said okay well this happened
genetically over many generations but if
you look at those rare cases where you
have soldiers from a long-established
northern family and their parents moved
South and then they grew up in the
southern location they had high sweat
gland inovation they were well heat
tolerant conversely if you had a
wellestablished southern kushu family
and they moved to Hokkaido and then had
their child that child
developed the northern sweat gland
inovation pattern so meaning less nerve
inovation of those sweat glands as you
mentioned before just as many sweat
glands just less nerve inovation
therefore those sweat glands could not
be activated they couldn't dump heat as
well their heat tolerance was lower
correct exactly right and and what's
what's what's wonderful is that
this gives an
advantage that you can't get through
evolution and that it can happen right
away in this in in one generation right
evolutionary change is slow right and
you can adapt as a species and as a
family over over many many many
generations but when you have a
phenomenon that is set by uh early life
experience well then you can benefit
from that early life experience within
your own life it's not that your great
great great great great grandchildren
will ultimately benefit you benefit
another wonderful example of this uh
comes from field mice vs and we were
talking earlier about how we both worked
with uh the scientist IR zuker at uh at
Berkeley who was a specialist in uh in
in inv Vols and uh what people found is
that if you take uh wild caught uh field
mice and uh you have uh a pregnant
mothers and you have them in the lab but
you manipulate the lights so that uh you
have artificial spring in other words
day length is getting longer day after
day during the pregnancy then what
happens is when their pups were are born
they will have a low density of fur
anticipating summer
temperatures uh if you however uh put
them in artificial fall where day length
is getting
shorter uh they will be born now with
high density of for anticipating winter
temperatures and of course you can do
this no matter what the season actually
is in the world by manipulating these
lights in the lab and so like the
sweating Japanese soldiers this is a
great example of early life plasticity
and just the sort of trait that if you
ask someone they would probably guess is
heritable but actually is not thanks for
mentioning Irv zuker who
uh you also mentioned was an adviser to
us both who's done incredible work in
circadian biology seasonal rhythms
hormones and behavior I have such
reverence for Irvin the experiment you
mentioned made me smile wide because
it's uh but one of gosh maybe hundreds
of incredible studies so if people are
interested in seasonal rhythms and
circadian rhythms and biology of the
most interesting kind definitely check
out Irving zuker's work at at Berkeley
we I'll provide a link to to his uh
PubMed there since we've been taking a
tour of individual variation in ol
Factory perception visual perception and
uh now heat tolerance um I have to ask
are you aware of any examples off the
top of your head um in the auditory
domain that particularly Intrigue you
yeah well I would say one really
interesting example has to do with
perfect pitch So Perfect Pitch as a
trait that is to say uh you have the
ability
uh to to hear a note played and say oh
that's a c right this is a pretty rare
trait so even if you look among highly
trained musicians if you went to Peabody
conservatory at my University Johns
Hopkins and tested people there you
would find a higher incidence of Perfect
Pitch than you would in the general
population but still maybe one in 10
trained musicians have perfect pitch and
parenthetically having Perfect Pitch
doesn't NE necessarily make you a better
musician uh but it's an interesting
phenomena and so the question is well is
perfect pitch heritable and the answer
is when you look at twin studies where
which is what we use to estimate
heritability the answer is it's kind of
low there's a heritable component but it
accounts for uh my recollection is on
the on the order of 30
40% of the variability in Perfect Pitch
however if people receive ear training
starting at a young age the chance that
they will develop Perfect Pitch can
improve drastically in your book unique
uh do you cover aspects of human
individuality that extend beyond the
perception domain um into the cognitive
domain well yeah absolutely and uh you
know I think I think it's good to set
the stage here if we're going to be
talking about heritability and human
individuality and and so if I can go off
on a little bit of a riff uh uh for the
benefit of your of your listeners and
viewers here pleas
so if you look at human traits whether
they are behavioral traits like shyness
or very straightforward morphological
traits like
height uh what you tend to find is that
there are very few traits that are
entirely heritable where all their
variability can be predicted based on
the gene variance you get from your
mother and father and there are a few
traits that are absolutely UNH heritable
but that most fall in between so let me
give an example everyone in the world
has either wet or dry ear
wax and it turns out that this is
determined by variation in a single Gene
the name of the gene is boring it's
abcc1
uh it's a ion transporter and uh there's
a variation in this Gene gives rise to
either wet or dry ear wax it doesn't
matter how your parents raised you it
doesn't matter what foods you ate
growing up doesn't matter what what uh
uh diseases your mother had when you
were in the womb it's
100% heritable well does this mean that
abcc1 we should call it the ear wax type
Gene well no because it's not there just
for that like this this Gene is
expressed in cells in all parts of the
body doing all kinds of things ear wax
is just something that we notice genes
don't code for traits they code for
proteins and so we have to be careful
about how we refer to them in that way
um for example the wet ear wax G uh
variant of the
abcc 11 Gene also confers a slightly
higher risk for breast cancer H uh so
clearly it's not just for ear wax it's
it's for a bunch of things most of which
we don't yet know about but in the case
of earwax this trait is 100% heritable
at the other end of the scale speech
accent is zero% heritable it is entirely
dependent upon the speech that you
experience uh in your childhood and
interestingly it's the speech of your
peers more than the speech of your
family which which is why the children
of immigrants sound like the place where
they wound up not like their parents uh
and there is no evidence for any degree
of heritability now just to be clear I'm
talking about speech accent like whether
you have a high or a low voice or it's
nasal or more or less resonant these are
physical things having to do with the
vocal tract and they are in part
heritable Okay so we've got one thing
that's 100% heritable one thing that's
0% heritable but where do most Things
Fall most Things fall in the middle
uh uh one of the most heritable traits
that we know about in humans is height
and in the United States height is about
85% heritable 85% of the variation in
the trade of height can be explained uh
by what you inherit from your mother and
your father well what's the rest well
it's nutrition it's the diseases you
fought off it's also random variation
which we'll talk about a lot
later um now you might say okay well
that's an estimate for people in the US
is this true all over the world well no
if you go to a place where people
routinely don't get enough nutrition and
are routinely fighting off infectious
diseases like this has been studied in
rural Bolivia for example or rural India
now height is no longer 85% heritable
it's only 50% heritable why
because people in these situations where
they don't get enough nourishment where
they're fighting off these diseases
can't live up to their genetic potential
for height if you want to make things
better for the people of the world then
everyone needs to
have basic things like the ability to
learn and enough nutrition and and
decent Medical Care and schools in order
to fulfill their genetic potential for
positive traits and uh height I've used
as an example because it is very
uncontroversial but we could apply the
very same analysis to
intelligence general intelligence now
there are people who argue about do
things like I Q tests really measure
anything real and there's been a lot of
fighting in the scientific literature
about this but I think intelligence
tests aren't perfect and they are
sometimes culture bound but they are
actually quite predictive of of of of
later success and uh much more so than
say sat tests or GRE tests or mcats or
other standardized tests but presumably
those correlate in some way they do I do
but but but the IQ tests are better
actually they talking about this the the
classic IQ test uh I am talking about
the modern variants of the classic IQ
test that are administered by trained
psychologists uh and aren't just a paper
form and so they're not perfect and no
test will be perfect but they're pretty
good and so then if you ask the question
what is the
heritability for IQ test score
uh well the answer tends to be different
depending upon the population if you
look uh again in in countries like the
us or in Western Europe that are fairly
affluent where where people uh tend to
have good access to to nutrition and
medical care and schooling and kids get
to play and they're not and they're not
traumatized by War then uh then IQ test
score is heritable in the ballpark of 60
70% but if you look at people who don't
have those benefits who are poor and
this can be in the United States as well
if you look at uh communities that that
uh face discrimination and have
consistently poor poor health care in
schools then IQ is less heritable why
for the very same reason that it is in
Heights because people can't live up to
their genetic potential when they don't
have the basic things that everybody
needs so presumably if two identical
twins and I realize they aren't
identical but you're familiar with twins
you have twin children um if two
identical twins are raised
separately uh the correlation in their
IQ is can only is it that only 60 I
think you said about 66% of their IQ can
be predicted on the basis of their
genetic makeup Alone um I mean it makes
perfect sense to me as to why if one of
those twins went to schools that were
demanding of you know a lot of different
topic matter um and the other one went
to schools where the the instruction
level was really deficient that one
would perform far less well on an IQ
test unless of course the IQ test isn't
tapping into school-based knowledge it's
tapping into some other um thermometer
of of so-called intelligence or IQ well
you know the thing is that good schools
correlate with many other things right
so the students that go to good schools
aren't just benefiting from good schools
they tend to also have good medical care
and safer less traumatizing
neighborhoods and they're more likely to
have books parents with books in the
home and uh uh and and a whole number of
things that are all beneficial so when
you try to do epidemiology on this you
have to be aware that things are very
deeply interconnected but but you bring
up a good point so it turns out that the
way we get these estimates of
heritability there's two ways one way is
to
compare so-called identical or
monozygotic twins with so-called
fraternal or dizygotic twins so the
identical twin TS will share nearly 100%
of their Gene variant and on average
fraternal twins share 50% of their uh of
their Gene variants and generally
speaking when people do these studies in
order to avoid confounds of sex they'll
compare same seex fraternal twins so
boys to boys and girls to girls uh uh
and uh when you put these incidents into
a formula called Fisher equation then
you can come up with an estimate of the
heritability of the trait but there is
an
assumption present in that and it's
called the equal environment assumption
you're saying well two kids raised in
the same family have the same
environments well that's not always true
right that can be violated by a number
of uh of different situations so it
turns out that a more powerful but much
more difficult way to estimate
heritability is by looking at twins
reared apart either identical twins or
fraternal twins reared apart and there
was a landmark study called the
Minnesota study of twins reared apart
which is abbreviated mistra that is
really the gold standard for assessing
the heritability of many different human
traits both behavioral traits uh but
also disease incidents but of course
it's a small n because you know the
population of identical twins rear toart
that you can get into the lab isn't
isn't that large they had something I
don't remember the exact numbers but
they had something like 80 some uh uh
identicals and 50 some
fraternal uh in their in their sample
but by doing this they were able to come
up with a lot of interesting estimates
and so for example most uh personality
traits uh what the
psychologists uh use the acronym ocean
to mean openness
conscientiousness empathy agreeableness
and neuroticism I think I got that right
spelled right uh that these traits on
average tend to be about
50% heritable and so okay you say all
right well 50 50% of those personality
traits is heritable the rest has got to
be like how you were raised it's got to
be in your family and so everyone was
shocked when they actually did the
analysis um and found that family has
almost nothing to do with
it and what what are are you kidding
it's it's it's it's it's got to and I
think the important thing to realize is
these traits I just listed you know we
call these personality traits but they
are not the sum total of the way you are
in the world parents can inculcate many
things in their children they can
demonstrate trades so people are much
more likely to go into an occupation if
their parents did they can inculcate
moral ideas and
religious ideas but in terms of these
ocean personality traits they have
astonishingly little to do with it so
then this brings up the question well if
50% of the variation in these
personality traits is not from your
genetics and it's not from your family
where does it come from and the answer
seems to be is that it comes from the
random nature of the development of the
body and the nervous system and this is
this is a point that I think many people
don't understand this is something that
biologists know but we've done a very
poor job of communicating to the general
public The genome all your DNA all three
billion bases of DNA all 19,000 or so
genes in a human don't make a blueprint
for making your body and brain there
it's not a schematic diagram that
connects everything to everything
particularly in the nervous system where
we have these hundreds of trillions of
connections rather it's a rather vague
recipe so the The genome doesn't say oh
okay you glutamate using neuron in the
brain region called the thalamus you
know grow for 200 microns towards the
top and then and then and then cross the
midline and then grow towards the ear
for you know another distance no it it
says something like hey you bunch of
glutamate neurons in the thalamus over
here in this area
about half of you cross the midline and
so what does this mean in terms of
individual variation what means well for
for for some individuals 40% of their
axons will cross the midline of the
brain and for another individual 60%
will even in identical twins and as you
correctly said a moment ago identical
twins aren't really identical either in
their bodies or their temperament so if
you take newborn identical twins and you
give them a CT scan just to measure the
shape of their organs they're not the
same you might have one twin whose
spleen is 30% larger than the than the
other Twins or whose liver is 30%
smaller than the other twins even though
they have the exact same DNA and they
were lying right next to each other in
the womb and presumably had the same or
very similar fetal environment and the
reason is the random or as we say
stochastic nature nature of neural
development a great way to study this is
with nine banded armadillos I know we're
getting weird here but I love the
armadillo because I've been told tell me
I don't want to uh uh interrupt you too
long but um as far as I know the only
animal in North America that carries
leprosy uh that is that is true and um
and there's a lot of twinning going on
in Armadillos right well what there is
is actually quading so armadillos or the
nine-banded armadillo in particular and
they're different armadillos I'm not
really an armadillo specialist so I
don't know if this holds for all of them
but the nine bounded armadillo is born
as identical
quadruplets awesome awesome so you can
take these identical quadruplet newly
born armadillo I don't know you think
you call them pups I don't know what a
baby armadillo was called I'm sure
there's some particular word for it
and someone will tell us in the comments
on YouTube what is the name of a baby
armadillo I know like a feret baby
ferrets are kits uh uh the moms are
jills the dads are bobs I used to be
obsessed with this kind of naming you
know it's a it's a business of ferrets
or a what is like a gang of raccoons or
whatever so if you can tell us what the
name is for the baby armadillos as well
as what do you call a group of
armadillos um you win the pride
associated with being right that's right
right one of my favorites is an a an
ostentation of peacocks amazing or a
murder of crows who comes up with this
yeah I know it's it's a good or a raft
of
otter I think it I I think that's
correct but uh so if you have four
newborn uh identical nine-banded
armadillos then this is a great model
system that biologists can use to study
uh uh uh stochastic differences in
development and and sure enough their
brains are wired slightly differently
their bodies are slightly different if
you test them behaviorally even very
very early in life they have different
propensities some are bolder and will
Explore More some are will tend to hide
in the corner more and you know we know
this from the lab you you get a box of
mice that are inbred from the breeder
and you pluck them out and they're not
behaviorally identical some might try to
bite your hand some will run away some
will stand stock still where does this
Behavioral variation come from in mice
that are nearly genetically identical
well it comes from a bunch of things
they don't always have exactly equal
experience but mostly it comes
from the pseudo random stochastic nature
of development I'd like to take a quick
break and acknowledge our sponsor inside
tracker inside tracker is a personalized
nutrition platform that analyzes data
from your blood and DNA to help you
better understand your body and help you
meet your health goals I'm a big
believer in getting regular blood work
done for the simple reason that many of
the factors that impact your immediate
and long-term Health can only be
analyzed from a quality blood test
however with a lot of blood tests out
there you get information back about
blood lipids about hormones and so on
but you don't know what to do with that
information with inside tracker they
have a personalized platform that makes
it very easy to understand your data
that is to understand what those lipids
what those hormone levels etc mean and
behavioral supplement nutrition and
other protocols to adjust those numbers
to bring them in are the ranges that are
ideal for your immediate and long-term
Health inside tracker's ultimate plan
now includes measures of both apob and
of insulin which are key indicators of
cardiovascular health and energy
regulation if you'd like to try insid
tracker you can visit insid tracker.com
huberman to get 20% off any of insid
tracker's plans again that's insid
tracker.com huberman to get 20% off and
is the pseudo random stochastic nature
of development one of the major major
excuse me driving forces for evolution
ution because you know we hear about
mutations and we always think or people
tend to think rather that mutations are
bad but of course mutations provide the
variation that can also subserve
adaptive traits I mean if you're a fan
of the X-Men as I am huge fan of the
Xmen the entire series every single one
including the Wolverine movies you
quickly come to learn that genetic
mutation is at the heart of variation
which is at the heart of individuality
which is what we're talking about right
and so genetic variation is at the heart
IND Duality but there is also there are
also these other things right that we've
talked about there's the effects of
early life experience and there is the
stochastic nature of development because
if you through the randomness of
development happen to have like a
particularly great liver you're not
going to pass that on to your children
right that isn't in your germ line you
won't pass that trait along just brief
insert here on germline we had odad RFI
on the podcast who studies um epigenetic
transmission and um and inheritance of
uh of of it's not lamaran we have to
point that out but um inheritance of of
sort of acquired traits it does happen
and the germine is the genes that are
present in the the sperm and in the eggs
all the other uh cells of your body have
genes of course but um the best way to
put this is uh simply going to the gym
and getting fit um does not make your
children more fit because the germ line
as far as we know is not modified in a
direct way uh in other words the DNA
within sperm and eggs are not modified
according to your behaviors in most but
not all cases that's right and and as
you uh as you correctly said about od's
work and and other people's work there
is what's called transgenerational
epigenetic inheritance which means that
you can have traits that are passed not
from one generation to the next but even
two generations to the grandchildren
that don't require modification of DNA
but to date that has been shown very
convincingly in in worms and in
Plants uh the evidence in mammals is is
really not there yet in in my opinion
and most of the claims for that and it's
a very popular thing to say I
epigenetically inherited my
grandmother's or great-grandmother's
trauma
uh the evidence at present is is poor
actually a lot of it comes from
epidemiology most of which came from
famines in the overx region of Northern
Sweden and they had very good medical
records and they said oh well if your
grandfather went through the famine then
you're more likely to have this trait if
you're male or if your grandmother went
through this then if you're if you're
male you have this trait and your female
you have that trait and I mean there are
two problems one is that there's not a
biological mechanism but the other
problem is that the way these things
were discovered is by something called
harking or hypothesizing after the re
results are known uh they did very many
statistical comparisons to try to find
something significant and you know from
your work in the lab that when you do
many comparisons you're going to get
some things that look significant just
occasionally randomly through through
through luck and you have to apply a
statistical correction called a bon
foron correction when you make many
particularly post Hawk comparisons after
the experiment uh comparisons to set the
bar much higher for accepting that data
and most of those studies they didn't
apply that correction and I remain
unconvinced of transgenerational
epigenetic in heritance in mammals now
let's be
clear just because it hasn't been shown
convincingly now doesn't mean that it
won't be there are some good people
working very hard on this and they may
well uh describe a mechanism and show
this convincingly in the years to come
but right now uh you may well inherit
your grandma's or great grandma's trauma
but you're probably doing it socially
not through marks on your DNA that
changes how your genes are expressed or
not expressed yes so I subscribe to the
idea that there is absolutely certainly
transgenerational inheritance of
parenting and upbringing right I mean
your grandparents raise your parents who
raise you not always people can be
adopted in fact I have adopted members
of my family um but if I understand what
you're saying
correctly the evidence that for instance
some stress related Gene was modified
during a trauma in my grandparents or
great-grandparents and the idea that
that was passed to me through my parents
that the evidence there is is far weaker
right and when you think about it well
like how did that happen that had to get
into your your grandparents sperm or egg
cell and then produce that effect in the
brain of your parents and then it had to
get into their sperm and or egg cell and
then contribute to producing it in you
but but fragmentation of DNA in sperm is
um or in eggs is is a is a common um
thing especially as people age DNA sperm
and eggs fragment um and it's possible
that some of those mutations still allow
for viable embryos so it's in theory The
Germ line could be changed by um
environmental events well right uh but
now I think you're starting to talk
about things that are heritable MH right
you're not talking about marks on DNA
you're talking about the structure of
the DNA right itself and that is its
own separate issue now I think I I want
to be really careful about this because
what is now I think fairly well
established is that you can transfer
things
epigenetically over a single
generation uh if as a result of
experiences that the mother has during
pregnancy so uh for example we know that
during the 1918 pandemic
flu uh many women were pregnant and got
the flu and if you look at their
children you find interesting
statistical anomalies and those children
for example the males wound up going
into the army for World War II and of
course the Army does a complete physical
and the records are very good so you can
go into that
database and you find that uh the male
children uh that were uh in utero during
the winter of 1918 during the pandemic
flu are on average a millimeter or two
shorter you might say a millimeter or
two that's nothing but in a huge
statistical sample of millions of people
that's enormously significant more
interesting is that the incidence of
schizophrenia went up about fourfold
from about 1% to about 4% and even
though autism wasn't a term in
1918 yet uh I don't think came along
later what we now retrospectively would
call autism also went up by about
four-fold so there's something about mom
being
stressed and carrying the fetus at a
particular stage that seems to impact
brain development in a way that then
makes that child more likely to be
schizophrenic or autistic when they grow
up do we know that it's stress and my
recollection of this I believe this was
um the late Paul sternberg's work as
well uh I maybe have that name um
incorrect but in any event that it is um
if pregnant mom gets the
flu in the first
trimester you see this higher incidence
of schizophrenia and autistic Offspring
um and but do we know that it's stress
per se because it's stressful to have
the flu but the flu is a bunch of other
things could be fever could be um uh
some breakdown in the immune barrier I
just want to open up the the number of
variables that this could be or do we
know that it's something in the
hypothalamic pituitary so-called stress
axis that is adrenals um so hypothalamic
pituitary adrenal AIS um like is it
elevated cortisol um or could it
literally be an immune neural
interaction of some other sort it's
probably the last thing you mentioned an
immune neural interaction and the reason
I say that is that uh Gloria Choy at
MIT uh uh uh together with her
collaborators has made a mouse model of
this phenomena so she takes pregnant
female mice and she injects them with
something that that it's she doesn't
actually in infect them with virus she
puts a chemical in that is on the coat
of viruses that mimics viral infection
and uh then what happens is that in a
way that interestingly is an interaction
with the with the bacterial content of
her of her gut produces a surge of a
immune signaling molecule called
interlan
17 interlan 17 can pass through the
placenta into the fetus and if it's
present just as you said at a particular
point in development do doesn't work
anywhere during pregnancy but during
something that is sort of the mouse
equivalent of the first
trimester if that occurs it causes
disordered development of the layers of
the cortex instead of it looking like
layers of a cake you see balls and
clumps of cells and parenthetically in
some but not all post morm tissue from
autistic people you can also see those
balls and clumps of cells are those
balls and clumps of cells thought to
reflect um alterations in cell
migration they are yeah some some I
don't know if it's entirely known how
much of it a cell division or migration
but certainly migration is a part of it
and it's very likely that that critical
moment uh to disrupt this ordering of
the brain and produce these inre es in
schizophrenia or or uh autism
vulnerability uh are coming at a point
where neurons are migrating uh during
development and uh so what choice group
did is they did all the things you would
want to do as a biologist so they gave
things to block the function of of this
interlan signaling molecule and it
blocked the phenomenon they artificially
injected the signaling molecule into
fetal brain when the mom hadn't been
stressed and they could they could
reproduce it so I'm not saying that
there aren't effects of stress hormones
from the hypothalamic pituitary axis
that are important that you mentioned
but in this mouse model system work uh
it seems that uh you can produce it
through this immune signaling pathway
and and so then the question is well
like are these mice autistic well how do
you know if a mouse is autistic and and
the answer is it's actually a little
vague right there are behaviors that
neuroscientists say are analogous of
human autism and one of them is If You
Give a Mouse a marble in its home cage
it will bury it over and over again
compulsively or bury many marbles and
people say that that is somehow
analogous to some of the compulsive
behaviors you see in autism it's a bit
of a stretch right I mean it's a
challenge to interpret mouse behavior in
in human terms but um it's a reasonable
First
Step incredible and uh I hope more will
continue to be done um as it surrounds
the uh first trimester influenza
hypothesis because it it's been around a
while and um and obviously uh there's a
spectrum uh of what we call autism
Asbergers and U nowadays people refer to
it as sometimes is neuroatypical there's
some high functioning people with Autism
there's some low functioning people with
Autism and for that matter there's some
high functioning and low functioning
people who don't have autism so um but
it is something that I think uh demands
our attention and and it that hopefully
will be resolved at some point because
also influenza is uh but one immune uh
insult um and presumably pregnant women
are being bombarded with all sorts of uh
viruses and bacteria and fungal
infections and fighting them off or not
fighting them off and who knows what the
variation in uh neuro immune
interactions exist in there uh that give
rise to you know good variation and
let's call it um you know uh
debilitating variation well that's
that's absolutely right and so for one
example is that uh we don't know what
the effects are on the children who were
in utero while their mothers were
fighting off covid right we won't know
for uh for a while or the calm and cold
and there might I mean there might be
nothing but or there might be something
serious uh lurking there like there was
for pandemic flu uh and it'll be very
interesting and uh and important to find
out
agreed I'd love to talk with you about
mindbody but before we do that I would
be totally remiss if I didn't ask for
your um
broad top Contour understanding of the
mini brain the cerebellum right the
so-called mini brain and here's why I've
been a practicing neuroscientist for you
know close to three decades I know where
the cerebellum is I've dissected a bunch
of them I um I could tell you where a
few things are in there and I certainly
have read about what the cerebellum does
but whenever I do a PubMed search on
cerebellum I see an ever
expanding set of things that the
cerebellum is implicated in not just
balance as most people hear but also
timing also cognition I hear about
timing in particular of motor Behavior
but then I also hear that it's involved
in learning and not just motor learning
and it certainly is involved in motor
learning perhaps that little mini brain
is
uh doing 50 or a thousand different
things but how should we think about the
cerebellum what is it doing and what are
some of its core operations that inform
both what it's doing and perhaps what
other areas of the brain are doing as
well because I can point to the retinas
or to auditory cortex or to the thalamus
and yes there's some mysterious nuclei
in the brain but to me the cerebellum is
one of the most cryptic and um
complicated structures to Jan and I know
you spent some time in there so what's
the cerebellum do well uh cerebella
researchers like to joke that the
cerebellum is a counterweight to keep
your head from falling forward oh
perfect well with all the texting
nowadays people need bigger cerebellum
that's right that's right probably over
many generations then that will happen
along with a expansion of the thumbs uh
so uh but of course everybody's going to
text with their mind in about another 10
years right you'll have elon's implant
and you won't need your thumbs at all
yeah or maybe just or my friend Eddie
Chang who's a neurosurgeon and uh works
on the auditory system he's been on this
podcast before he was saying that if you
in theory and actually in practice you
could just record the neural output to
the muscles of the speech system
essentially and you could just amplify
that and you could text without actually
speaking um in fact when we read he told
me uh we are
actually receiving the signals
as if we were going to speak the words
we're reading but they don't quite
arrive at the place where you could get
a full-blown postseptic potential so
you're not actually moving the vocal
Machinery um so that means the motor
signals are getting sent out there and
so you're speaking what you are reading
but you just don't know it that's right
and it's very analogous to what happens
during the rim phase of sleep right when
you have commands your brain is issuing
commands to your muscles to to do things
uh like behave in your dreams to to run
away or go here or go there uh but those
signals actually are blocked in the
brain stem prevented from from reaching
your muscles because the uh nerves that
don't go through your brain stem like
the ones that control your eye movements
aren't subject to that blockade that's
why you can produce the rapid eye
movements in in RM sleep but yeah this
is a general theme in the brain a lot of
times you have the output but then you
shut it down and there are Rim sleep
behavior disorders where people thrash
and move in their sleep uh during during
REM and uh it's because this outflow
that's normally blocked isn't isn't
blocked have you ever had the reverse
happen uh I have where you wake up and
you're still in so-called remonia you're
still paralyzed yes and there's that
Split Second that feels like eternity
where you are wide awake and you cannot
move and I'll tell you it's terrifying
yeah sleep paralysis and actually you
know it's been known uh forever you can
actually find ancient Greek depictions
of people lying with a demon on their
chest paralyzing them and that is
actually from sleep paralysis later
Hogarth uh did a drawing uh of exactly
that uh so yeah this is a well-known
phenomenon but to get back to the
cerebellum uh as we started um so
the cerebellum
is as you said definitely involved in
motor coordination so people who have
damage to the cerebellum aren't
paralyzed but they tend to be clumsy uh
they tend to not coordinate their
movements they have a disturbed gate if
they're reaching for an object they
often overshoot it and have to make
successive approximating motions to get
back uh to their target so so that's
well understood but if you look through
Evolution the
cerebellum is connected to this brain
region called the thalamus and it's
connected from there to many regions
including the frontal cortex where
phenomena like uh like
planning and uh decision making and uh
moral sense and many aspects of
Personality seem to be encoded so then
the question becomes well that's very
far away from being clumsy what are
these connections doing and as time has
gone on I've been in this business from
over 40 years now I'm an old guy and so
initially we said oh yeah
cerebellum movement control motor
coordination that's what it's for as
time goes on as you correctly said the
cerebellum has been implicated in more
and more functions many of which are far
removed from the motor system and and if
we're looking for a theme about what the
cerebellum does is that it is there
to predict the immediate future it's
trying to determine what's going to
happen in the next second or two to best
guide behavior and as you can imagine
this kind of General computation could
be applied very well you can see why
it's important for you know motor
systems and doing sports and you know if
you're trying to hit a baseball and
looking at what the pitcher is doing and
trying to anticipate what the pitch is
but it also comes up in a social realm
if we're trying to read someone and
predict what they are going to do is
this person Friend or Foe which is one
of the first things that we try to
assess when meeting someone are they
competent which is the second thing we
try to assess uh when meeting something
a lot of this depends upon predicative
circuitry and uh it dep depends in part
on the cerebellum and it seems to be at
least partially impaired in people who
sustain cerebellar damage so it seems as
if
interestingly the cerebellum started out
for prediction related for motor control
and through Evolution its basic
computation has been applied to other
non-motor behaviors now I'm speaking in
generalities and of lot of the details
of this remain to be worked out and
understood but I would say that is in a
nutshell the modern conception of the
cerebellum thank you finally somebody
explains to me at a top Contour but
highly informed way what the cerebellum
does I couldn't be more grateful my
pleasure in all aspects of biology and
life the term nature versus nurture is
relevant but never so much as when
thinking about the nervous system and I
know this firsthand because I've studied
neural development both the nature side
the so-called hardwired stuff that genes
just set up neurons wire up to that
neuron Etc the cerebellums in the back
the eyes are in the front the hardwired
stuff uh and then the softwired stuff
the nurture stuff is the stuff that can
be modified by experience what are your
thoughts on nature versus nurture and
should there even be a versus in there
yeah I don't think there should and and
I have a lot of problems with nature
versus nurture as a as an expression it
was popularized by Francis gton uh in
the 19th century a a colleague of uh of
uh of darwins and I think it's wrong in
or misleading in a lot of ways so of
course the nature in nature versus
nurture is meant in this case to mean
heritability right what you inherit in
the gene variations from your mother and
father and nurture means like how your
parents or your community raised you uh
the problem I have with nurture is that
it is too narrow a term that really it
should be replaced with the word
experience
and experience in the broadest possible
sense not just social experience but uh
the foods your mother ate when she was
carrying you in utero um the diseases
you fought off or your mother fought off
while she was carrying you uh in utero
the bacterial population of your gut uh
so experience meaning anything that
impinges on you starting from the
earliest stages of fetal
developments uh continuing to the last
day of your life I think it should be
very expansive much much more than
social experience in the family or the
or the community and as you mentioned I
have a problem with versus because
there's this idea that these things are
are essentially in opposition well is he
that way because of of of his Gene
variance or is that way because of what
what happened to him and I think the
thing to realize is that uh experience
and heredity interact in all kinds of
interesting ways some of which are
oppositional and some of which are
reinforcing a classic one from genetics
has to do with a genetic disease called
phenol ketonuria or
PKU uh which is uh an inability to uh to
metabolize uh the dietary amino acid
phenyalanine
and uh so uh in order to have this you
have to inherit broken copies of this
Gene from both your mother and your
father so it's a so-called recessive
trait and here's where the experience
comes in it only matters if you eat
foods rich and fenal alanine if you
don't it doesn't matter that you
inherited these things right so that's a
way which genes and experience interact
an idea of in ways in which then they
interact
positively um think about athletic
ability right so a lot of athletic
ability is has a heritable component if
you are born fast for example uh then
you're more likely to do Sports and
practice them and get better Sports as a
result of your experience so here genes
and experience are feeding back on each
other in a positive feedback loop so
there really isn't uh a vers a versus at
all and then of course the last thing is
that this isn't the entirety so we
talked earlier about the pseudo random
nature of development
stochastic development and so if I were
to take the phrase nature versus nurture
and reconfigure it I would change it to
read heritability interacting with
experience filtered through the random
nature of development now that doesn't
fall off the tongue as elegantly as
nature versus nurture you know nature
versus nurture is like if the glves the
gloves don't fit you must quit you know
it's got that kind of Snappy snare drum
beat but I think it's it's a
accurate so
heritability interacting with experience
filtered through the randomness of
development yeah so we can shorten that
up and um and we'll just call it um uh
the Linden hypothesis you know I don't
think I can take credit for that that's
it belongs to other people sure but um
but there's a long history in science of
of things being U shortened up and uh
coined and that's uh as important and
I'm not we're not trying to rob
attribution here um uh and the good news
is perhaps you can't call it the lyen
hypothesis but I can all right and what
I found is as with the Galpin equation
which is now out there as a hydration
it's a formula a formula that uh gives
broad but um research and formed
parameters as to how much water one
should drink in order to maintain proper
hydration for physiologist Dr Andy
Galpin who's a PhD in uh physiology and
and an expert in all aspects of exercise
science there's the Galpin equation
there's the soberg principle so I'm
naming these things left and right right
um where appropriate and
um so I'm naming these things uh
sparingly and where appropriate um so
from here on out heritability
interacting with experience filtered
through the randomness of development is
the lynen hypothesis and I'll be damned
if anyone's going to rename it uh um
faster that I'm going to propagate it so
all right well I think all the the the
geneticists will be nashing their teeth
uh about this being named after someone
who isn't actually a geneticist quite
all right and their dentists will thank
me let's talk about mindbody
okay I'm am fascinated by this um for a
couple of reasons and I promise to keep
this brief but when I was growing up I
was very interested in animals and
biology and my father's a scientist and
I got very interested in Neuroscience
early um as people perhaps know and so
much of Neuroscience as I was coming up
through the mid90s 2000s 2010 to 20
stretch was focused on the brain piece
MH very little on the body there was
nothing about gut brain AIS in the early
discussions and cours work um in
parallel to all of that I've been
interested in mental health physical
health and let's just call it
performance and um got interested in
meditation respiration based practices
things like Yoga Nidra things that by
way of experience I understood
immediately had a profound influence on
the nervous system states of Mind and
Body nowadays there's an entire
Institute at the National Institutes of
Health for complimentary health and
Medicine essentially exploring things
like yoganidra respiration practices
even supplements and things of that sort
and there's this understanding that oh
my
goodness the nervous system extends into
the body and the body sends neural
signals back into the brain and so this
whole notion of Mind Body has
fortunately migrated away from kind of
um California counterculture esselin
Institute only uh you know um hippie New
Age Magic Carpet stuff by the way that's
not what I believe that's but that's
often how it was looked at in the past
and now people at every level of science
and medicine and every major university
and in every scientific journal are
starting to publish papers about the
interactions between bodily organs like
the breathing apparati the diaphragm
lungs the heart heart rate variability
we hear about um the liver the gut brain
axis in particular and so Mind Body the
idea that our thoughts could influence
our body and that our bodily State could
influence our thoughts is fortunately
not just understood but it seems to be
both accepted and
appreciated so what are your thoughts on
mindbody what ises that mean to you and
what do you think is the potential of
the mindbody interaction it seems to me
we've just barely scratch the
surface yeah well I'm glad you asked
because I think it's a it's a really
fascinating uh situation and uh where
things are changing very very quickly
and I think to me the most important
thing
for people to understand is that when
you have a hypothesis let's say you have
a
hypothesis that uh
meditation can uh attenuate chronic pain
all right well there is a temptation to
think that this operates outside the
realm of Science and biology that is in
some arery
realm in the clouds that this happens
and and and I mean for for good reason
there are a lot of people who will
describe it in exactly that way with
auras or they they Co-op scientific
terms like resonance and energy but they
don't actually use them in scientific
way so you know there's a lot of very
fuzzy language that surrounds this but
it shouldn't obscure the fact that when
you have a hypothesis that say some
mental State like meditation or or or
guided breathing uh uh affects some
process in the body that you should be
trying to understand this in terms of a
biological hypothesis not in terms of
some some
some indistinct realm that that is that
is different like manifestation yeah and
you know I really learned this in
initially from my father my father was a
psychiatrist in fact kind of a talking
cure
old-fashioned psychoanalyst had his
practice in uh Los Angeles and uh we
would have dinner together every
Wednesday night and uh he would always
tell me about his patience he was very
careful to keep confidentiality right he
wouldn't great confidentiality but you
know I would say oh yes how's your
narcissist oh we had this dream so was
you know this was this was normal
conversation when I was 14 15 years old
with my dad and one day I said Dad it's
really clear to me that through this
talking cure a large fraction of your
patients feel better and they conquer
their depression or or or their
obsessive thoughts or things that are
blocking them how do you think it works
and he says well we don't really know
the mechanics But ultimately when it
works it's not working in some araer
realm it is was working by changing the
biology of the
brain and when he said that it was like
a lightning bolt went off in my head and
I thought well I don't have the kind of
personality to be a talking cure
psychiatrist I'm not nearly nice enough
but I could understand the underlying
biology maybe I'll do that uh and
so as you've correctly pointed out when
you say the phrase Mind Body you're
talking about two directions you're
talking about mental functions affecting
the body and then you were also talking
about how phenomena in the body affect
affect the mind and we're understanding
so much more about how that happens and
I think the general thing for your your
listeners to appreciate is that we have
some
culprits here right and generally
speaking there are there are two classes
of culprits so if you want to get
signals about the body to the mind
there's two ways to do that one of them
is through neurons that reach out into
the body and sense things and this is
referred to as
Inception right so as opposed to extra
reception your your outward pointing
senses these are the senses that monitor
or your own body and and while we can
consciously be aware of a lot of that
information a lot of it is happening
subconsciously like your breathing is
happening automatically most of the time
without you thinking about it and that
depends upon sensors about your blood
chemistry and the state of your lungs
and a number of other things that are
regulating that process and it's all
happening in the brain usually below the
level of your conscious attention in
addition to the neural signals there is
also a whole realm of hormonal or
diffusible immune signals and what these
are is that these are chemicals that are
released into the bloodstream and that
move throughout the body and that can uh
uh activate neurons in the brain or in
other parts of the nervous system to
produce changes in uh in mental in
mental function
and I think the real thing that is
exciting a lot of people right now has
to do with immune signaling molecules so
there's a class of molecules called cyto
kindes and cyto kindes are basically the
signaling hormones of the immune system
and they they can flow through the
bloodstream and through lymphatic fluid
uh and reach many parts of the body uh
we've known for a number of years that
the specialized receptors
for these cyto kindes are found
throughout the brain and yet we know
very very very little
about about what they do and that's
going to be an
astonishingly fruitful area of
scientific research but but to give one
one
Exemplar um there are a lot of things
these days suggesting a a a link between
inflammation in the body whether it be
in the gut or in other places to
depression well how might that work well
it could work either through
inflammation sensing neurons sending
electrical signals to the brain or and
it's not either or it could be both it
could
be immune signaling cyto molecules
produced at the site of inflammation
that then travel through the bloodstream
and the lymphatic system to then reach
the brain bind ctors and have effects
and so you know one of the mysteries
about depression is that uh it's not
that tractable to pharmacological
therapy so if you look at people who
suffer with depression about a third of
people see significant benefit from
Modern
SSRI and related anti-depressant drugs
uh about a third C very tiny benefit and
about a third SE no
benefit at all and part of the reason is
because maybe our term depression is too
big a bucket depression is actually many
different biological disorders and only
a subset of those are are helped by
ssris and we'll need different therapies
for the other ones that's certainly part
of it um but part of it might actually
have to do with inflammation so if you
think that inflammation is a a risk
factor in depression well you could do
something very simple right you could
you could gobble an ibuprofen right
there's a whole bunch of
anti-inflammatory drugs that are very
well understood and so well what if you
just say all right you know uh let's
have a study where we have a bunch of
depressed people and we have them all
eat anti-inflammatory drugs for a few
weeks and we see if this relieves their
depression and the answer seems to be no
it doesn't well and that's that's a
little bit hard to understand because
there are definitely links between
inflammation and depression so for
example one of the early treatments for
uh for Hepatitis C that's since been
superseded by more modern drugs was a
pro-inflammatory
cyto molecule and when you gave it to
people to treat their hepatitis C almost
everyone became depressed on this drug
so oh well this really seems like like
like a link likewise there are certain
uh neurological diseases like multiple
sclerosis it turns out the incidence of
depression as a comorbidity in multiple
sclerosis is enormous and you might
think well there's a trivial reason for
that if you're paralyzed from Ms you're
bummed out about life and that's the
reason but if you look at people who
have spinal cord injuries from accidents
they actually have major depression at a
at a at a rate from people who are
uninjured so that doesn't seem to be it
it's not just that you're bummed out
from being paralyzed although of course
it's reasonable to be bummed out about
being paralyzed but that's not it so
what happens in Ms well there's a bunch
of cyto kindes including one called
Incan 6 I6 that's elevated massively if
you if you take a spinal tap and you
look at cerebral spinal fluid and so
that could be causitive for depression
so all these real reasons to think that
inflamation is involved but yet the idea
is still a bit messy so now what if
instead of looking of the general
population of depressed people you look
at the subset of people that don't
respond to SSRI anti-depressants are
they helped by anti-inflammatories and
there there's a bit of a hint that maybe
they are it's not definitive yet there
are a couple of studies it's it's it's
right on the edge but I think this is a
really good example of how we are going
to see progress very soon soon in the
body to mind part of Mind Body medicine
that is going to be of
enormous uh benefit to people so
interesting could I get your thoughts on
one candidate hypothesis that I've been
thinking about I've covered depression
on a few episodes and um I've had Robin
cardart Harris um from UCSF and Dr
Matthew Johnson from your very own John
Hopkins University both of whom work run
Laboratories studying psychedelics for
the treatment of depression um the
clinical trials on Sil cybin um and to
be clear cybin still illegal it's been
decriminalized a few places but we're
not talking about recreational use we're
talking about several therapy sessions
and then two without psilocybin then two
um 2.5 gram approximately dosages of
psilocybin given separately again with
therapist present and then follow-up
therapy sessions seem to lead to relief
of depression in approximately somewhere
between 65 and 80% of people um in some
cases total remission in some cases um
some relief without remission okay so we
can kind of set that result on the Shelf
it's been repeated a number of different
times compare that to the results of
ssris which seem to help a third of
people a third minimally and a third not
at all and of course there's the side
effect profiles of the ssris and
Associated drugs not just the ssris but
gryon and the other anti-press
uh that are taken in prescription drug
form and then there's this uh
inflammation piece so could we
hypothesize that relief from depression
has something to do with neuroplasticity
rewiring of neural circuits and that
psilocybin we know can encourage
neuroplasticity and that perhaps ssris
can encourage neuroplasticity in some
people not all and that inflammation is
a barrier to
neuroplasticity um to me this is the
only thing that can reconcile the the
current status of the of the results and
then there's ketamine based therapies
and so we have to also kind of set that
on the Shelf but let's set that aside on
the shelf for now to keep it simple um
it seems to me that based on the time
course over which ssris work the fact
that they increase serotonin uh very
quickly but the relief from depression
comes much later the fact that
neuromodulators like serotonin are
intimately involved in neuroplasticity
they can some cases gate neuroplasticity
that it all centers back to changing
neural circuits and so what we're really
trying to do whether or not it's
transrenal magnetic stimulation or now
we can throw ketamine in there or
psilocybin or ssris we're that treating
depression is about rewiring the brain
it's not about chemical A or B per se
although serotonin seems
involved to me what I'd love to see is
are more studies about the interaction
between neuroplasticity and inflammation
and are we seeing that kind of work out
there and um because these results sort
of sit as disperate somewhat conflicting
but it seems like inflammation is is
anti- neuroplasticity and broadly
speaking here I realize there are many
inter lucans there are many you know
some of which are inflammatory some of
which are anti-inflammatory but is that
is that a meaningful hypothesis and it
um can do you think there's any hope
whatsoever to actually cure depression
if we if we sort of start to uh unify
the the the results in these different
camps yeah I think it's a completely
reasonable hypothesis and I would be
broader and I would say honestly the
relief of any neuros psychiatric
condition ultimately is from
neuroplasticity in some form or another
and I think it's worthwhile to step back
a bit and talk about what
neuroplasticity means uh to date there
has
been a focus on synapses on the contacts
between neurons as the site of
neuroplastic
and that's warranted synapses are
plastic they change as a result of
experience as a result of hormone
changes as a result of exercise as a
result of lots of things but synapses
are not the Beall and end all of neural
function so for example neurons work by
sending electrical signals uh uh along
their lengths and and between neurons
and interconverting those with chemical
signals and the processes of generating
those electrical signals the ion
channels that are involved that are
embedded in membranes that are involved
in that are also plastic they can also
change as a result of experience that's
what we call intrinsic plasticity as
opposed to synaptic plasticity in
addition there are literal morphological
changes so when we talk about the wiring
of the brain sometimes we're talking
about literal wiring like C A wasn't
connected to cell b and now it is and
that changes and then sometimes well
actually cell a was connected to cell b
but cell b wasn't responsive enough and
now there's a change in cell b so now
cell a can fire cell b and that could
have been a result of a change in its
synapse making it more receptive to
neurotransmitter released from cell a or
it could be something intrinsic in cell
a that makes it fire its electrical
signal it Spike more easily I think that
one of the key cell types that's going
to be important for your
hypothesis um linking inflammation to
synaptic plasticity is going to be a
cell called a micral cell and micral
cells are non neuronal cells in the
brain they're motile they can crawl
around they have long processes and they
can gobble things up they can literally
sort of chew away way and digest bits of
the extracellular scaffolding that
surrounds neurons and synapses and
thereby renders them plastic they can uh
destroy synapses and there is a lot of
indication that certain disease States
may involve over exuberant microa
pruning synapses to a degree that they
shouldn't and we know that microa are
chock full of cyto kind receptors and so
are responsive to inflammatory signals
when we're talking about inflammation
and we're talking about drugs it's
worthwhile to mention that there are a
lot of Behavioral things that also can
influence the signaling so we know and I
know you've discussed on your program
the incredibly salubrious effects of
physical exercise on mental function so
exercise is about as good
anti-depressant as
ssris are and the side effects are only
good side effects as opposed to the bad
side effects of ssris and again this
isn't working through some Ayer realm
the reason that Exercise Works to
relieve depression and the reason that
Exercise Works to maintain your
cognitive function as you age is because
of biological Pathways that we are now
uncovering some of which will involve
micral cells and neurons and other types
of cells in the brains some of which
will involve not the neurons in the
brain at all but the brain's vasculature
so we know that exercise is very
salubrious for keeping blood flowing to
the brain and when you're young you have
a super abundance of blood flowing to
your brain so it doesn't matter if it's
reduced transiently you're fine but as
you get older uh your blood vessels
become more uded and less elastic and
you're closer to the to the to the
trouble spot uh and if you exercise
regularly you can dilate and make your
blood vessels including those in your
brain more elastic and that is almost
certainly protective against both
depression and cognitive decline uh as
we
age I am a fan of exercise but I'm
fortunate that I enjoy running and some
forms of resistance training um so I
always assumed that the good side
effects were just the positive mood
effects um until the recent literature
that as you mentioned uh improved
vascular vasculature blood flow and
reduced inflammation if not during the
exercise when inflammation actually
increases um decreases inflammation um
I'm delighted to hear you say the word
microa and um my postto adviser the late
Ben Baris would be especially delighted
people can look up Ben I'll provide a
link to his um uh biography in the show
note captions because he really
championed um to the point of of um I
don't know if Champions even a
sufficient word I mean Ben was beating
the drum saying we have to pay attention
to Gia we have to pay attention to Gia
for the longest time gleo were relegated
to these other journals they even had
their own journals and in the last what
is it 10 years there's been a kind of
explosion of research exploring the role
of microa and other gal cell types and
it's it's really f fantastic to see that
uh this actually the most abundant cell
type in the brain is the the gal cell um
are getting the attention they
deserve it's absolutely true uh and uh
you know we scientists like to think
that we're very rational creatures and
we're not subject to fads but we totally
are right when I started out in this
field um in the early 80s everything was
about opioid peptides and then there was
a period where gaseous neurotransmitters
like nitric oxide were all the rage and
you know right now glea are in the
spotlight for good reason I'm not trying
to say that that it isn't worthwhile but
there is this phenomenon of things being
fattish and people jumping on bandwagons
and it happens both in terms of the
subject we study but also in terms of
the techniques we use and right now the
technique that is most most fattish
involves um single cell expression
profiling that is creating a list of
what genes are turned on and how strong
they're turned on in single cells and
seeing how that changes in different
cell types and with experience and it's
a very it's a very valuable technique
but one could argue that it is perhaps a
bit overused and that 15 years from now
people will go back and say gosh those
folks in 2023 we're really overdoing it
with the Single Cell profiling yeah and
if anyone's thinking about getting into
the field of Neuroscience or another
area of biological or other research I
can just tell you that if you're
starting your PhD or your postto take a
look at whatever fat is happening now
and just know that in five years it will
be something different and it takes you
about five years to finish your PhD or
postto so pick something different than
what's fattish now and you'll you'll
land right on the money that there's
always a lot to do you don't have to do
what everyone else is doing
and indeed uh the deletion test becomes
relevant here um the deletion test as it
was described to me by my colleague EJ
Chichi at Stanford is um if you look
around and you see um one or more groups
um doing what you want to do very well
just pick something else your life's
going to be a lot more pleasant um
absolutely I agree with uh with EJ on
that uh
entirely let's get back to mindbody um
there are a bunch of different domains
of mindbody as you um so apply pointed
out it's bidirectional mind informs the
body body informs the mind um but we
could probably break this down into uh
respiration so breathing um conscious
patterns of breathing um emphasizing
inhales or emphasizing exhales cyclic
hyperventilating
Etc could also be thought patterns um a
little bit harder to break those down
but um many not all but many forms of
meditation involve having a very still
body not all there's walking meditation
Etc but still body um focused mind kind
of a not a state that we are in a lot of
times unless we direct that state um
there are still other mindbody patterns
of communication through very still body
deep relaxation things like Yoga Nidra
non-sleep deep rest um there's hypnosis
there's um uh touchbased Body Mind
communication if we're going to talk
about Mind Body
also we should refer to as body mind um
how do we dive in and think about this
because this is involving clearly a
thousand different neural Pathways not
just the Vegas nerve as it's you know
typically people just kind of hang their
hat on Mind Body must be Vegas nerve and
of course it involves the Vegas but the
Vegas is an extensive set of Pathways so
um how do you like to frame up mind body
and what's most intriguing to you about
mindbody communication both in terms of
the biology and its practical app
well I think just as we talked about how
there are two potential Pathways in
conveying signals from the body to the
mind there are also two potential
Pathways at least two potential Pathways
to conveying signals from the brain to
the body uh and they are the the the
neural signals that are conveyed by
neurons that actually get there and they
are uh hormones and neurotransmitters
and cyto kindes that are released from
the brain I should mention that that
hormones are actually produced by
neurons including for example some of
the hormones that you think about uh as
being produced as as sex hormones like
estrogen is produced by neurons in your
brain for example um so let me give an
example that I think is a bit out there
but I think is really really
fascinating and this comes from uh from
the cancer world and so uh melanoma is a
is a is a bad cancer it kills a lot of
people it can spread it's uh highly
metastatic and we know that
melanomas often become inovated that is
to say they become contacted by neurons
and wrapped and receive signals from
them and we also know that if a melanoma
becomes inated then the prognos is for
that patient is worse it's more likely
to grow it's more likely to spread well
how does that happen well recently uh
there have been some reports that uh
show that neurons that innervate the
melanoma don't act directly onto the
tumor cells rather what they do is they
secrete a signaling molecule that has a
receptor
on immune cells that are patrolling the
edges of the melanoma tumor and nibbling
away at it and they when that signaling
molecule is released from the neuron
it uh shuts down or reduces that immune
patrolling function and then as a
consequence the tumor can grow and
spread and butt off more readily so this
signal that comes from neurons is
sending the ambulances home so to speak
yeah exactly and and the signal is
something called calcitonin Gene related
peptide or
cgrp uh I'm familiar with cgrp from the
domain of touch and its involvement in
um I think like itch perception do I
pain perception and itch perception
right interesting yeah and so all right
so if
neurons can um can affect the
progression of cancer through their
activity and these neurons in the
periphery are ultimately connected to
the
brain through a couple of different
hops um then is it reasonable to
hypothesize that mental processes could
affect cancer progression so let's say
we hypothesis and it's a wild hypothesis
and I want to just emphasize that there
is not evidence for this but let's make
the hypothesis that says that through
meditative practice you
can slow the progression of certain
tumors that tend to get
interated right well right now this is
just kind of a wild idea but I think the
important thing as I've said before that
this is a wild idea with a biological
substrate it's not like you meditate and
Magic happens and force fields open and
the Angels
Sing and then your tumor shrinks this is
we are saying that activity in certain
areas of the brain is increased by this
meditative practice and that this send
signals to this neuron and this neuron
that actually go to the tumor and make
something happen through this
biochemical pathway that we have
defined right and to me this is
speculative but it's also
extraordinarily exciting right it opens
a kind of
Investigation of mind to body signaling
that has received very little attention
up to now incredible and I say
incredible because
while you're giving an example of cgrp
and nerve inovation and
metastatic uh
tumors I absolutely love the idea that a
phenomenon involving some practice that
could be put under the umbrella of Mind
Body or body mind um becomes something
en entirely different when we're trying
to hang that on the hook of a biological
process it's like something
fundamentally changes there right um you
know it's amazing to me for instance
that early on psychedelics and breath
work conscious breath work uh were
lumped together cost people their jobs
at major universities I won't name the
universities because we're all you work
at one I work at another and there's a
third one um called Harvard I guess I
just Nam them um but nowadays there are
Laboratories at every single one of
those institutions studying deliberate
respiration on health as well as
psychedelics
um and meditation for that matter um
with the goal of understanding what cyto
kindes what neurotransmitters Etc change
through defined Pathways including Vegas
but frenic nerves and uh frontal cortex
and all the stuff that is considered you
know classic rigorous Neuroscience so I
do think we we've entered a new era um
so it's not cting people their jobs
anymore it's actually giving people
their jobs and it's federally funded
which itself is also fantastic in my
opinion so we are in a new era what do
you think um needs to be done to really
nail down the idea that how we think
influences our biology even though it's
a total duh because everyone knows that
chronic stress for instance is can be
detrimental short-term stress can
actually be beneficial but um and stress
is a mental process that essentially
deploys chemicals in the body that then
create other issues in the body that
then create shifts in mental processes
you know it's so it's so obvious when
it's spelled out but it's just
remarkable to me how this has just been
lumped in the category of like woo
science um and I can't quite figure out
what needs to be done in order to
convince people that their nervous
system includes stuff outside the skull
and spinal cord and of course of course
of course it would work this way well
right and I I think
it is the job of biomedic researchers
right now to
reclaim a lot of this from from the
realm of nonsense and the problem is
there has been a lot of
nonsense and you know there's there's
sort of a visal reaction you when when
someone says oh yeah well you can do me
breath work and it'll realign your
chakras and that is you know what will
uh uh reduce your anxiety or your gut
inflammation and I'm tempted to just go
oh shut up but what if the chakras are
collections of nerve ination of bodily
sphincters and you know it could make
sense right it could but it's got to
there's got to be some some biology in
some cases these analogies are rooted in
something real and in some cases they're
just made up
 right and I think the challenge
is to have really rigorous scientific
tests of these things to take it back
and to be willing to say all right there
have been a lot of claims for example
made about how mental processes can
influence the body and only a subset of
those are going to be
true and of that subset it is our job to
understand how they work both to
rationalize them but also to to optimize
them and and make them better I mean
there's no question that mental
processes affect the body I mean we know
for example that if we just keep you
awake and don't let you sleep long
enough you'll die and what will you die
from you'll die from sepsis because the
the barrier between your gut contents uh
and and your perineum will will will
will break down right well so
how does that happen right we're just
starting to understand like there's a
really
dramatic example but there are going to
be many more subtle examples so you
you've mentioned breath work a couple of
times and I think this is really
interesting um my colleagues who are
interested in respiration tell me that
you can record in many different places
in the brain many different places in
the neocortex and other regions and find
a signature of the breathing Rhythm sort
of as a
background uh to neural activity you can
find it in the cerebellum you can find
it in the frontal cortex you can find it
in uh the habenula which is implicated
in many things including depression you
can find it lots of places so the idea
that
conscious modulation of your breathing
could have
manifold effects on neural function I
think is
reasonable given that kind of
observation here
here let's talk
about you a bit uh more uh you've been
so gracious in covering this wide array
of topics and with uh such eloquence and
uh I must say I've been delighting in
all of
it you are in a unique position these
days because uh if I understand
correctly uh you've been diagnosed with
a fatal illness um I suppose we've all
been diagnosed with a fatal illness of
sorts because um we're all going to die
sooner or later yes um if you're willing
could you tell us the story of how that
diagnosis came to be what your initial
reaction was and where things stand now
and and perhaps we can explore some of
the well let's just say pleasant
surprises that have emerged
um since that initial diagnosis well
sure I'd be happy to uh so in the uh the
uh summer of 2020 uh in the dark days of
covid when things were looking really
bad I developed profound shortness of
breath I couldn't get up a flight of
stairs without uh uh without huffing and
puffing and I thought oh well I've got
Co but I took covid tests and there was
they they they were all negative but I
thought oh I must have covid I've got
the symptoms of covid I have respiratory
issues I'm feeling weak it's got to be
covid and after a while when this didn't
go away my wife said look you got to go
into the doctor this is crazy it's you
got to find out what's going on and I
did and they uh they hooked me up to an
electrocardiogram and they said oh uh
you've got atrial fibrillation meaning
that your heart is doing two beats every
time it should do one so I have a very
high heart rate and when the heart beats
that fast it can't work very effectively
there is enough time to recharge before
the next beat comes now it turns out
that there is a very straightforward
therapy for this uh atrial fibrillation
comes from uh electrical signaling in
the heart sort of swirling about in a
circle and and reactivating part of the
heart muscle faster than it should and
so if you thread through a catheter in
your in your in your in your groin up uh
up through blood vessels you can put in
a little needle and use that to quize
and to ablate a tiny little strip of
cells in the heart that will produce a
barrier that will prevent that aarant
return of electrical activity and will
cure atrial fibrillation so I had that
process that ablation surgery and sure
enough it it cured my atrial
fibrillation and I was feeling terrific
and they said oh as a followup come back
uh a few months later and we'll do an
echo cardiogram to see how your heart
looks and they did and they went oh my
God there's this huge mass pressing
against your heart it's like the size of
a Coke
can uh here's what we think it is we
think it's a hadal hernia we think your
stomach has poked up through the
diaphragm muscle and it's nestling next
to your heart so the way we diagnose
this it's kind of humorous they say chug
this can of diet Dr Pepper and then
quickly get up on the table and we'll do
the
echocardiogram and in the echocardiogram
we can see a signature of the popping
CO2 bubbles in your soda and if we see
those in the mass then we know it's your
stomach so I did it I chugged it I got
up there oh nope it's not your stomach I
said oh okay well what we think this is
is a Teratoma and a Teratoma is a
developmental uh anomaly that you carry
usually from fetal life where there's a
group of different cells that gets in a
place where it shouldn't during
development and then grows you've
probably heard about people who
sometimes get like a a tooth that grows
hair in their abdomen Sometimes women
have these around their ovaries and
they're not malignant they don't spread
it's a fairly easy thing but I have this
enormous Coke can pressing on my heart
it may have we don't know have been the
source of my atrial fibrillation to
start with but in order to deal with
this I had to have open heart surgery so
I had the surgery and it was a big hairy
deal I was told it would last about five
hours it turns out it lasted two days
wow um they had me on the heart lung
bypass machine longer than you're
supposed to because you're very likely
to throw a clot and get a stroke
fortunately that didn't happen I had
very skilled surgeons at John's Hopkins
it was bleeding so much that they
couldn't close the chest so they had to
do all the surgery and then just leave
me anesthetized with my chest open until
the bleeding stop and they so the
surgery was a be and then uh I'm waiting
to get the pathology report back on the
tissue they removed and it came back and
it was bad news sorry it's not a
Teratoma it's not benign it is a kind of
cancer called sovial saroma and sovial
saroma is a moderately rare cancer and
it usually affects the synovium which is
the lining of the joints or some other
places it's pretty rare to have it
happen in the heart there are a few
examples if you look in the biomedical
literature for common cancers like Tes
testicular cancer or breast cancer there
are huge tables of Statistics from
millions of patients on what's been
tried and what works and what the
prognosis is for sovial saroma of the
heart they're only individual case
reports oh there's a guy in Kenya and he
got it and this is what happened there's
there's there there's there's a woman in
Minnesota and this is what happened with
her right there are no statistics
because because it's that rare and and
and the oncologist said well I think
you've got 6 to 18 months to
live now this was uh
about uh now
27 months ago so I've fortunately uh
exceeded that lifespan estimate and I
think we got to be clear also that you
know being an oncologist has got to be a
terrible job for many reasons but one of
them is that you got to give a lifespan
estimate even if you really don't have
the data to do it in a very inform you
can't just say I won't do it right you
got to do it people expect it so you
know I'm not saying like oh the
oncologist was incompetent because I've
outlived my estimate you know he was
trying to do something based on very
little information made his best
guess so
um so so you know I got this information
and I was Furious I was so angry heart
cancer who the hell gets heart cancer is
that even a thing have you ever heard of
somebody with heart cancer not until now
no heart cancer what the f I've got
heart cancer this is this is crazy time
I was 59 years old I I got a lot to do I
can't have heart cancer
and what was
I think transformative for me is
that at the same time that I was feeling
white hot angry with the
Universe I was also feeling a deep sense
of gratitude for what I've had I've had
a terrific life I'm not that young I've
had a lot of it and I had great parents
wonderful friends growing up I've had a
good career
uh it's been a fairly easy run of it um
and I
think the ability to have a job where
you follow your own curiosity every day
there's nothing like that so few people
in the world get to live that way I feel
incredibly grateful and I feel
incredibly grateful my family and I have
a wonderful wife named Dena and she's
just the best how do I deserve this I
don't deserve her
you know
honestly um so you know in Neuroscience
we often think oh well there's a you
know you have a state you have a set
point are you anxious or are are you
relaxed are you fleeing or are you
approaching you know it's it's like a
single axis well but it isn't you know
and I think most people understand that
but but dumb me I I I didn't until that
moment really understand that I could
feel profoundly grateful and profoundly
angry in the very in the very same
moment and you know having cancer and
getting the kind of treatments the chemo
the radiation you know it's famously
deeply unpleasant and I had all that and
it was just as unpleasant as anyone's
cancer story that that that you've heard
the radiation burned my esophagus I
couldn't eat for weeks it was months it
was painful to swallow you know bad
stuff lots of people
have have had to have bad stuff like
this and and what
I it realize you know this is It's a
deeply um unempowered situation to be a
medical
patient particularly when there's
something serious you have you have a
limited sense of agency things are being
done to you drugs go in you that make
you feel really bad and there isn't
there isn't that much to do and I
realized that for me the sense of agency
came from being
curious from being a total nerd about
things and part of what it made me
curious about was my own mental
processes as they related to my cancer
and my cancer
diagnosis uh so for example I'm getting
the ch Mo and uh I should just say as
background I'm fortunate I I don't have
a tendency for depression I'm a pretty
upbeat guy I don't take any credit for
that I think I was just born lucky and
and raised lucky right but day after day
of feeling bad in your body from chemo
boy it's hard to be positive it really
is I could not overcome it my mood got
really really low and I could tell
myself this is going to be over it's not
going to go on forever you won't feel
this way forever and you would think
that as a rational person I could talk
myself out of that mood but I couldn't
you know probably because there was my
brain was a wash in interlan six and I
couldn't overcome it I felt really low
but at the same time I was sort of out
of remove being a nerd about going like
huh I bet these cyto kindes are messing
me up right now I bet that's what's
going on and that gave me some sense of
agency in a Time where otherwise I
really wouldn't have it another thing it
really brought home to me is this issue
that we were discussing earlier about
how malleable perception is and
perception of time in particular if
someone had said to me when I was
healthy before I was diagnosed you're
going to die in five years I would have
gone oh no no no no no no I'm 59 years
old I should get way more than 5 years I
got a lot of things to
do uh professional things personal
things family things I got all things to
do no that wouldn't be right I'd be very
upset but you know if you told me after
my diagnosis of 6 to 18 months oh you
get five years I'd be like five years
yeah that's pretty good I can do a lot
in five years I can finish up in the lab
and I can I can do some good work and I
can spend time with my family and travel
and save her life's pleasures and do all
kinds of things five years great
and of course it's the same five years
right the only thing that's different is
the is the
context but I think the thing that
really I realize the
most is that I really couldn't and still
can't engage with the idea of myself
being
gone so yeah I can do practical things I
can update my will
I can write letters for my people in my
lab so you know if I kick off you know
they've got that to take to their next
job you know I can do all these nuts and
bolts things but in terms of genuinely
engaging with my own
demise I really find that as much as I
try I really can't do that and I first I
thought well that's just your own lack
of imagination Lyon it's just because
you know you're not very good at
this but the more I thought about it I
thought actually no this is a human
thing this is a fundamental human thing
and and one of the things when I look
back on the 40 plus years I've been
doing Neuroscience that's different is
that when I was first trained the brain
was really described as a reactive
structure something happens in the world
you know it comes to your sense organs
your eyes your ears it goes into your
brain it triggers some things you you
think you make decisions and then you
make an action that goes out to your
muscles or or or and that's the loop and
that's what the brain does and what we
have known in more recent years is that
actually when the brain is waiting for
something to happen it's not just idling
and spacing out that the brain is at
every moment subconsciously trying to
predict the near
future predicting the near
future is predicated on the idea that
there will be a near future that is to
say that you won't be dead and gone
right that there'll be a future for you
and so I think that my ability which I
think is actually a
human I mean not my ability my failure
which I think is actually a human
failure to truly engage with my own
demise is a feature it is it is a side
effect of the fact that the brain is
always trying to predict the future and
so that was interesting to me just as a
way that my illness was revealing
something about the brain but it also
made me think a lot about the world's
religions right religion is everywhere
in the world if you ask anthropologists
is there any society that doesn't have
religious ideas both say no they said
they don't always have the word religion
they might just say well yeah in this
place everybody knows that you know the
world's on the back of a turtle and that
you know this and this happened there
are these rules they may not call it
religion but every place in the world
has religion not everyone is religious
but it is across cultural Universal and
most religions not absolutely every
single one but almost every single one
has stories of afterlife or
reincarnation in which your
Consciousness
endures well why would that be and and
and in many religions they've got a deal
right follow these rules in life and
then you'll be rewarded in the afterlife
and that's that's a very a very general
idea or punished in the afterlife or
punished in the afterlife right
and you know in some religions you meld
with the Divine in other religions
you're reincarnated is this or that
heaven or hell right there's there's
variance but but they share that your
Consciousness endures and so why is this
so popular all over the world well I
would
hypothesize that it is a side effect of
the fact that the brain can't help but
always trying to predict the future when
we can't imagine the world without us in
it then we are forced to concoct stories
of the
afterlife
fascinating and makes me want to ask
about this feature of time perception um
my undergraduate graduate and post talk
advisors all sadly died earlier early
really um by pretty much any standard um
and I was fortunate enough to be in
communication with the the last two as
they were going through that process um
both of them described um a heightened
sense of gratitude especially for things
that
previously they had not paid attention
to so we call this noticing the little
things yes but um that makes me conclude
that something about the knowledge of
one's impending death however far off
that might be um shifts our
attention at least temporarily leads to
this sense of slowing down a bit because
in order to shift our attention to quote
unquote with the little things or things
that we previously
overlooked um there's this sense of
slowing down and we know from uh basic
uh videography photography that slowing
down means an increase in frame rate M
right that uh you know you know shooting
at um strobe frame rates gives you the
perception of uh strobe um shooting at
very high frame rates allows you to see
things in very slow motion you're
noticing subtle variations that normally
you
overlook um I not trying to be overly
reductionist about this uh this process
of enhanced
gratitude um that's uh that you describe
and how it was alongside intense anger
but have you noticed a shift in your
perception of time because you were
given initially this okay X number of
months and then now with the you're
still here fortunately um and with this
kind of openend did well it wasn't the
prediction that was given to you by your
oncologist but it's unclear how long
you're going to be here right um which
is how most of us exist you have the
sense that it's sooner rather than later
but you don't really know so I'm curious
as to how the idea that okay you have 12
months more to live versus more than 12
months but not infinite but of course I
know that I've hopefully have more than
12 months but it's not infinite yes so
you know this this idea of of the the
Finish Line the cliff leaving aside
whatever might happen afterwards I don't
know haven't been there
um it changes what we notice by way of
changing our perception of time um I
mean this is a this is a profound tuning
of our perception what are your thoughts
on that and and do you notice the each
sip of coffee you probably don't notice
each step across the kitchen floor in
the morning you're probably paying
attention to your lovely wife and kids
and things that day but
presumably um it's Dynamic but what is
your perception of time like now with
the understanding that yes you made it
through the past the gate that was
predicted but what's lies ahead is is
uncertain yeah so that's really
interesting and I would say definitely
my perception of time is slower and it
seems like an age since I was diagnosed
but I think part of that is
because it's been action-packed in other
words since I was diagnosed so many
emotionally Salient things non-trivial
things have happened so many intense
discussions with my wife and my friends
and the people in my lab uh you know my
wife and I have taken a lot more
vacations than we normally do so you
know we're running all over the world
and there's a certain sense of of
packing it in that I think influences
time perception but I would say actually
for me
personally the Gratitude isn't about the
little things the Gratitude is about the
very
biggest things the Gratitude
is gratitude for being a sensient being
and having that
blessing the Gratitude is
for being able to have a life where I
can follow my own ideas and
creativity and my gratitude is for choke
up the profound love that I've felt from
my wife and my
children you know it's all the little
stuff it's the big stuff that I think
about when I think about gratitude it's
not noticing the sip of tea it's it's
the big
issues
and you know for me I you know I don't I
want to delay my death as much as
possible of
course but
uh when I think about
it the part that makes me
upset is leaving people behind
it's not for myself I've I've had a
great
life um I've had a lot of it I'm 61 I'd
like to go longer but that's that's a
pretty good run I've gotten to do lots
of things in those 61 years and and have
wonderful loving
interconnected experiences and so the
negative part is about what I
leave behind
certainly what you've left behind is
enormous um and has been the consequence
of actions long before your diagnosis
which I think is a is a clear lesson to
everyone um I can't speak for you but
don't wait for the
diagnosis um you've mentioned the sense
of agency uh that you felt um by being
able
to pay attention to and explore your
experience of
let's call it what it is impending death
um and at the same time you as you
mentioned you've Amplified and uh
accelerated the number of things that
you've put into the world recently
writing incredible um articles about
your experience of life and death and we
will of course link to those so people
can read them um I've read them all and
they are uh profound and they don't just
feel important they clearly are
important so very few people have uh
your insight into the nervous system at
the mechanistic level but also at this
more holistic level that um you've
clearly displayed to us here and and in
your research and in your book writing
and public speaking um you know I think
it's a it's a risky thing to ask uh
somebody for advice um but I can't help
myself because um I think it's a
it's a real opportunity um if you had
advice um to give to any and all of us
um based on the whole experience yeah uh
all of it from go as they say right um
if if you're willing and feel free to
pass but if you're willing um what is
your advice well I would say the advice
that is really Universal
is what everybody already knows and is a
bit trait but I'll say it anyway and
that is appreciate what you got while
you got it and you know this isn't any
big secret and everyone knows it I would
say for a subset of people the way of
the nerd is very empowering I don't
think that's the case for everyone I
think
for a subset of people who are deeply
curious as their nature turning that
Curiosity to your
own mortality and your own medical
situation can be
empowering and and useful but I don't
think that should be broad advice I
think that's only for a fraction of
people that's probably the worst thing
they could do and there's nothing wrong
with that everybody's everybody's
different right not everyone should
adopt the way of the nerd but for a
fraction of people it's a really really
good thing to
do this is normally the portion of a
conversation with a guest where I list
off the many many things they've done
and how grateful I am and and all of
that is absolutely true in the case of
you being here today and the work you've
done but I think it's self-evident how
much you've uh
not just accomplish but how much
knowledge you've put into the world and
not just scientific knowledge but
knowledge about The Human Experience um
of others and of yourself and so I just
want to extend a
giant thank you on behalf of the
listeners and viewers and myself thank
you for coming here today thank you for
doing what you do and um so great to
still have you here and to have this
conversation and I hope it goes longer
and no matter when it ends uh you've
done an enormous service to humanity
well thank you that's very kind it's
been a it's been a pure pleasure to have
this discussion with you thanks David
thank you for joining me today for this
discussion with Dr David Linden if
you're learning from and or enjoying
this podcast please subscribe to our
YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc
cost way to support us in addition
please subscribe to the podcast on
Spotify and
and on both Spotify and apple you can
leave us up to a f-star review if you
have questions for me or comments about
the podcast or guests that you'd like me
to consider hosting on the hubman Lab
podcast please put those in the comment
section on YouTube I do read all the
comments please also check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast not on
today's podcast but on many previous
episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we
discuss supplements while supplements
aren't necessary for everybody many
people derive tremendous benefit from
them for things like improving sleep
hormone support and focus the hubman Lab
podcast has partnered with momentous
supplements if you'd like to access the
supplements discussed on the hubman Lab
podcast you can go to Liv momentus
spelled ous so it's lives.com
huberman you can also receive 20% off
again that's live momentus spelled
us.com huberman if you haven't already
subscribed to our neural network
newsletter our neural network newsletter
is a completely zero cost monthly
newsletter that includes summaries of
podcast episodes as well as protocols
that is short PDFs describing for
instance tools to improve sleep tools to
improve
neuroplasticity we talk about deliberate
cold exposure Fitness various aspects of
mental health again all completely zero
cost and to sign up you simply go to
hubman lab.com go over to the menu in
the corner scroll down to newsletter and
provide your email we do not share your
email with anybody if you're not already
following me on social media I am hubman
lab on all platforms so that's Instagram
Twitter threads LinkedIn and Facebook
and at all of those places I talk about
science and science related tools some
of which overlaps with the content of
the hubman Lab podcast but much of which
is distinct from the content of the
huberman Lab podcast again it's huberman
lab on all social media platforms thank
you once again for joining me for my
discussion with Dr David Linden and last
but certainly not least thank you for
your interest in science
[Music]