welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Kelly
starett Dr Kelly starett is a doctor of
physical therapy and one of the world's
experts in movement that is he teaches
people how to move better for sake of
sport for sake of recreational Fitness
and and for everyday living today we
discussed several important topics
including how best to warm up for any
and all workouts he also tells us how to
improve our movement patterns for
cardiovascular exercise for sport for
resistance training across the board how
to move better and how to improve our
range of motion with the minimal amount
of time investment we hear a lot about
different forms of stretching we hear
about Dynamic stretching we hear about
passive stretching Dr stared explains
how to improve our range of motion
across our entire body in the best
possible ways as well as how to offset
or repair any imbalances that stem from
muscular skeletal problems or from
neural issues and how to reduce soreness
how to improve our posture seated
standing and movement-based posture we
talk about nutrition so today's episode
covers an immense amount of actionable
information that I'm certain all of you
will benefit from Dr Kelly starett has
authored several best-selling books some
of which you may have heard of such as
Supple Leopard he was was actually one
of the first people to become synonymous
with the use of a lacrosse ball or foam
roller but really even though a lot of
people have talked about those what he
was really doing there was to emphasize
the importance of understanding the
relationship between the skeleton the
muscles the nervous system and the
fascia and today we also talk about
fascia which is an incredibly
interesting and important topic in
addition to Consulting and coaching for
various college level and professional
athletes and teams Dr Kelly starett and
his wife Juliet starett co-own the ready
state
we provide a link to the ready state in
the show note captions there they have a
plethora of useful information and
actionable protocols I should mention
years ago I took one of the courses from
the ready State it's a really
interesting course that we touch on some
of the protocols from today it's all
about pelvic floor so whether you're
male or female and regardless of age
understanding your pelvic floor how to
take care of your pelvic floor in the
context of exercise posture Etc is
vitally important for all sorts of
vitally important bodily functions so
today we also touch on that by the end
of today's episode I'm certain that you
will be armed with a number of new
highly actionable protocols I should
emphasize these protocols take very
little time and have an outsized
positive effect on your movement your
posture and your overall health before
we begin I'd like to emphasize that this
podcast is separate from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford it is however
part of my desire and effort to bring
zero cost to Consumer information about
science and science related tools to the
general public in keeping with that
theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of
today's podcast our first sponsor is
Maui Nei venison Maui Nei venison is
100% wild harvested venison from the
island of Maui and it is the most
nutrient-dense and delicious red meat
available I've spoken before on this
podcast about the fact that most of us
should be consuming about one gram of
quality protein per pound of body weight
every day that protein provides critical
building blocks for things like muscle
repair and synthesis but it also
promotes overall health given the
importance of muscle tissue as an organ
eating enough quality protein each day
is also a terrific way to saave off
hunger one of the key things however is
to make sure that you're getting enough
quality protein without ingesting excess
calories Maui newy venison has an
extremely high quality protein per
calorie ratio so that getting one gram
of quality protein per pound of body
weight is both easy and doesn't cause
you to ingest in excess of calories also
Maui venison is absolutely delicious
they have venison steaks ground venison
and venison bone broth I personally like
all of those in fact I probably eat a
Maui Nei venison Burger pretty much
every day and occasionally I'll swap
that for a Maui Nei steak responsible
population management of the axis deer
on the island of Maui means they cannot
go beyond a particular Harvest capacity
signing up for a membership is therefore
the best way to ensure access to their
highquality meat if you'd like to try
Maui Nei venison you can go to mauii
venison
docomo to get 20% off your membership or
first order again that's mauii venison
docomo
today's episode is also brought To Us by
ju ju makes medical grade red light
therapy devices now if there's one thing
that I have consistently emphasized on
this podcast it's the incredible impact
that light can have on our biology now
in addition to sunlight red light and
near infrared light have been shown to
have positive effects on improving
numerous aspects of cellular and organ
Health including faster Muscle Recovery
improved skin health and wound healing
improvements in acne meaning reductions
in acne reduceed pain and inflammation
improved mitochondrial function fun and
even improving visual function itself
what sets Tu lights apart and why
they're my preferred red light therapy
device is that they use clinically
proven wavelengths meaning specific
wavelengths of red light and near
infrared light in specific combinations
to trigger the optimal cellular
adaptations personally I use the juv
whole body panel about three to four
times per week typically in the morning
but sometimes in the afternoon and I use
the juv handheld light both at home and
when I travel if you'd like to try ju
you can go to ju spell jv.com
/ huberman juv is offering an exclusive
discount to all huberman lab listeners
with up to $400 off select juv products
again that's ju
jv.com huberman to get up to $400 off
and now for my discussion with Dr Kelly
Star at Dr Kelly Star at welcome thank
you my friend been wanting to get you on
here for a long time for many reasons
not the least of which is that you've
just pioneered so many areas of Health
and fitness that I don't even know where
to start frankly but let's jump in with
the Big M with movement you're an expert
in dissecting complex movement figuring
out how people can move better and also
figuring out how people who are doing
what they think are simple movements are
actually making their life either more
complex or more painful than it needs to
be
so you're also known for helping people
with so-called
Mobility um which of course falls under
the umbrella of movement and I can't see
somebody do a foam roll or anything with
a lacrosse ball where they're loosening
up or talking about fascia without also
thinking about you so that should frame
today's conversation at least partially
well to kick things off when you look at
how most people
sit walk and do their quote unquote
exercise resistance training Andor
cardiovascular hopefully and
cardiovascular training
what are some of the most common
problems that you see is it imbalance
like leaning to one side is it that
their bodies are trained into asymmetry
is there any way to kind of um you know
Mass diagnose everybody all at once in
this first question let me uh borrow a
couple analogies from one of my favorite
people Katie Bowman
and first thing is she will point out
and it's not a Perfect Analogy so bear
with us is this notion of mechano
transduction which means that at a
cellular level your tissues some of your
tissues specifically need mechanical
input to express themselves you want a
strong tendon how do you get a strong
tendon you have to load it right does it
do tendon things does it is it
lengthening underload does it express
shortening under load is do isometric
holds so we can start at that level she
points out that if you put a a again not
a Perfect Analogy but if you put a an
orca into captivity over a while that
Orca fin will start to fold
folded fin syndrome it's nicer than
Flopper floppy fin syndrome that's hle
and what you're doing is when you alter
the environment that this amazing animal
lives in it's not swimming it's not
fighting it's not hunting you're not
loading the base of that Fin and so what
happens is that collagen breaks down and
we start to see changes in that in that
expression of that so what we can start
to say is again not romanticizing the P
toine era when human beings were paleo
and but what is it that we need in our
daily dose lives to maintain the
Integrity of our tissue systems exposure
so that our brain says this is safe so
that you actually have tendons and
ligaments that can do what tendons and
ligaments can do and fascia that is can
be
springy if borrow another sort of kitty
bism if we have a movement language an
actual language made up of words how
many words are you using today and most
of us aren't using that many words so
very few words so I sit I stand I walk
very slowly I sit I stand I walk very
slowly so everything is just in those
few and then I go exercise using the
same words I'm on the exercise bike
right I'm on elliptical which doesn't
actually ask me to have any hip
extension and suddenly you can see that
our movement language which we're really
codifying under intensity load right
we're coming very competent in these
adaptation positions sitting what ends
up happening well we start to see that
our bodies or adaptation machines and
they just begin to adapt and so suddenly
what we have is a human body that
doesn't Express normative range the
brain may not think that that range is
even safe and put there then we start to
sort of minimize the movement choices
that the brain has the movement options
that the brain has so really the
question is you know what low loads
establish things at low loads and low
speeds you can get away with everything
why because this body is rad and it's
designed it's durable It's Not Fragile
it's designed to be ridden hard and put
away wet for a long time remember when
you were 17 we cut off your hand you
would grow back the next day right you
would think about the Falls you took
skating and you'd be like ah that sucked
the next day Put Your Shoulder back in
you just kind of
resawn so what is it that we need to put
into our movement diet and then we can
start to separate out should that be
exercise or should that be movement and
now the real filter that we should be
beginning these real and Earnest
conversations about is what is it in the
environment given that I'm a busy
working person and maybe I have some
agency in the morning and maybe I have
some agency in the afternoon but let's
take exercise out of it the one hour
discreet working on Zone 2 cardio
working on right my evidence-based
practice what should I be doing the rest
of the time so for example one of the
things that we're huge fans of the
evening is sitting on the ground for 20
to 30 minutes in in what um uh cross
layed um squatting yes um long sit side
99 anytime you need to fidget fidget
what you'll see is you start to
accumulate exposure which I think in my
world view is the first order of
magnitude in problem solving is how do
we have the human be exposed to the
thing we're trying to change or improve
or restore normative ranges so that
would be in the evening just getting
down on the floor yeah that that
behavior
alone cultures that toilet on the ground
sleep on the ground we start to see fall
risk in our elderly population
attenuate to zero approximate zero lower
hip OA lower low back OA and it may just
be that we're using and touching some
shapes and our bodies are saying hey
let's just keep that around let's let's
let's normalize what the hip should be
able to do in terms of you're a
connective tissue think about you know
the idea here is that we're we're
loading you passively actively whatever
that you're saying to your brain muscle
you know this this is a quote from one
of my PT instructors and this is really
important if people take this away they
should listen to this muscles and
tissues are like obedient dogs at no age
do you stop adapting at no age do you
stop healing those things slow down it's
a little bit harder to have the same
adaptation we did we weren't in
full-fledged puberty but you can always
adapt in the first order of business if
you spend 20 or 30 minutes sitting on
the ground you're going to start to see
that my hamstrings start to feel better
my hips start to feel a little better
because I'm just spending time in these
ranges and my body is is going to start
to adapt as I increase my movement
language would you extend what you just
said to um like if somebody has a
hardwood floor and maybe a little um low
pile rug or something like that and
they're going to I don't know watch a
podcast or a movie or show in the
evening they stretch out and you know
like on their on their belly like sort
of up up dog or Cobra or whatever it's
called so so basically any kind of
movement where you're on the ground um
any kind of um squatting stret and maybe
they start to stretch a bit here and
there oh so now we're into the real
magic the behavior where are we going to
stack these behaviors so if you have to
get up and down off the ground plus one
right I got to get up and down off the
ground every day so if you're an older
person who may hasn't gotten off the
ground I'm older I'm just talking about
over 50 you may not have gotten up and
down off the ground for a hundred years
you just don't do it anymore right we
want to hear why I think MMA is so
amazing you have to get up and down off
the ground a lot right if you do go to
Jets right how about yoga how about
Pilates you're like wow there's a lot of
time organizing on the ground so a lot
of people Ida Ral really said Hey how do
we help the person organizing gravity
first and foremost right then we have
someone like Philip Beach who is this
incredible uh he wrote this book on
functional embryology which I highly
recommend called movement uh muscles and
meridians I think muscles and meridians
but his hypothesis is that one of the
ways that the the body Tunes itself is
by being on the ground again restoring
native ranges reapproximating joints
right kneeling walking and and if and if
you just took a step back and said
what's it look like for the last 10,000
years you know when have we 10,000 years
ago my understanding is that I'm a
little fatter your femur is a little
longer but we're pretty much the same
people maybe I don't digest milk yet
maybe that's the understanding but
ultimately what behaviors have changed
we're off the ground and so this is an
easy don't need any equipment can drop
this in can answer my emails watch TV
that seems like the how we're going to
improve and be able to start to untangle
this very complex coring not when people
have a lot going on I love this um you
and as you pointed out sorry the roller
is already there so you're sitting there
and the roller there another barrier to
adherence knocked out so you're like oh
might as well just what's stiff today
what hurts today how could I have some
self- soothing input and when we're
working at high levels of performance
like the highest levels these range of
motion like keeping you being able to
access the full sort of Arsenal of what
you can do with your body these movement
Solutions sort of like eedle portal plus
the Olympics right you would see that
this is an easy way for our leite
athletes to work and integrate without
having to do another thing so what I'm
getting here is that everybody
regardless of age should get down on the
ground once a day and get up off the
ground at some point you can use
whatever you want to help you get up and
down off the ground so those of you
listening you're like I can't do that um
you know there's a a test we we write
about in the book um that if you just do
crisscross applesauce standing you
should be able to lower yourself to the
ground and stand back up without using
your hands okay so cross cross the feet
just for those that are just listening
cross the feet yep and then just slowly
lower yourself into SE don't collapse
just lower yourself to the ground and
then without putting your hands down or
knee down can you stand back up and
should one be able to do with um either
foot over the other seems like I should
use my left leg and right leg equally
right I shouldn't have a good side and a
bad side but what's interesting is the
data I think is that like it's a nice
predictor of all cause mortality
morbidity that's fine but what it really
hints at is your changes in how your
body interacts with the environment that
because you've adapted suddenly this
skill that you've done 100,000 times
200,000 times of the kids in crisscross
applesauce you suddenly are confronted
as an adult with a skill you can no
longer perform and it doesn't require
massive hip range of motion doesn't
require full range of motion your ankles
it's actually a really fair test but if
you're missing some of these end ranges
you're going to struggle and it's nice
now that I have this like what's the
session cost I'm become a I love cycling
mountain biking Is My Jam but if I ride
my bike a ton my hips get super tight
but if I have some assessments just like
Vital Signs blood pressure 120 over 80
that's not good blood pressure but it's
a nice decent reference now I create
some movement minimums that help me
understand how my body is interacting
with stress environment nutrition
exercise etc for some people maybe me uh
if I were to you know sit cross-legged
on the ground for a bit um and then
stand up oh yeah if it hasn't been in a
while like kind of like just kind of
ache but I consider myself pretty you
know pretty mobile once I warm up I can
run for an hour and a half jog for an
hour and a half once I get warmed up in
the gym I can move at what at least for
me is is satisfying amounts of weight so
I wouldn't say that I'm out of shape I
wouldn't say I'm in spectacular shape is
it normal for us after a certain age to
kind of feel like we Creek or ache as we
move in or out of a new movement I mean
is that is that does it fit with being
still a healthy person or should we just
not have any of those kinds of like that
was like I got to like that was rough
that was super rough yeah maybe you know
sitting for 30 minutes and standing up
and feeling like you have to kind of
open yourself up with a can open so to
speak well a couple things there one is
you said New Movement so one of the ways
we Define best athlete is who's the
person who can transfer the skill their
current skill set and pick up the new
skill the fastest so what I'll say is if
you want to test how fit you are how
good your program is go and jump someone
else's program let me know how that goes
can you perform the skills are are you
skilled you're not I'm chuckling because
I joined Cameron Haynes for his Weight
Workout which is you know High
repetition circuit work for that went on
for about 45 minutes minutes none of the
weights were particularly heavy but it's
just non-stop I was sore and I normally
don't get sore for more than a half day
if if at all soreness hasn't really ever
been an issue for me I was sore for
almost a week and a half maybe two weeks
like it was it was insane it was we're
GNA this is so good opens up the next
thing right uh founder of CrossFit Greg
glasman one of my earliest influences
coaches says we failed the margins of
our experience so what you just saw was
hey here is this metabolic pathway range
work that I have not inoculated myself
to and I think we're at an interesting
place where Fitness has become hobby
Fitness has become sort of my my
personal Pastime and I can go to the gym
and I can look jacked you're jacked in
tan you're very handsome 49y old but
what we start to see is the things that
make us look aesthetically pleasing or
I'm functional enough isn't the same
thing is preparing for sport or
transferring to new skill and in fact I
would say if I had a a spectrum of
activities I'd put like Fitness thing
over here like I go to a camp I just do
a million reps I Breathe hard it's super
fun I'm in I'm in Zumba I like I'm
miroring and I have positive regard and
I see my friends on the other side we
have very much Sports specific training
the only goal is to support the sport if
you're an elite soccer player we have
goals offseason but in the in season
it's to support your body to win but one
step back from that i' call Sports
preparation training which is where we
start to see sort of some really pattern
interference between what the internet
says I should do to have huge quads and
the best way to create an elite Sprinter
or an elite footballer or right in that
Sports preparation training I can be
think of it gpp plus looking at
positions and how things transfer a
France Bosch is a great example of
sports preparation training a Dutch
thinker his books are great and you'll
see understand that really what we're
trying to do is in sports preparation is
say hey what is this complex system in
front of us what's the minimal amount of
input so that we can still go and
project ourselves into the world through
Sport and performance and on the other
side suddenly we we do come up
confronted with hey I'm doing this thing
and I jump in with my friend and I get
brutalized which is actually a problem
that we have with people really good fit
athletes and I throw them into like a
group fitness class and they can do so
much work that they wreck themselves for
weeks and that's probably what happened
you're so strong and you know how to
just be uncomfortable and you just did
this freakish amount of work without
giving yourself a chance to adapt and
that happens all the time so going back
to the um getting down on the ground
once a day oh yeah um and then getting
up um I'd like to just uh I want to get
to Fitness and sports training as as
well but um is there another practice or
or set of practices related to where we
do our profession work yeah so I can
stand I have a standing desk I have a
drafting table and I'll sit stand I'll
stand for a while I'll sit stand for a
while sit I have a stool I like to be at
a stool that's where my back is not
supported um and so I try and Vary it as
much as I can and thanks to you I got um
thanks to your recommendation that is I
bought one of those little um kickstands
that goes underneath the desk from Rogue
I don't have any Financial relationship
to Rogue I sent them you're making tens
of dollars on this fidget stand I sent
them I sent the money like everyone else
would one could probably build one too
this is a little fidget stand I love
that thing cuz it reminds me to you know
to to swing my swing my foot while I'm
there while even while I'm standing so
so that's what I've done to try and keep
some Mobility during the day and I want
to double click on that because that's
really amazing because what you've done
is said hey I can't control this aspect
of my envir I have to do some deep work
that means I might need to perch or I
might have to sit at a conference table
and then what we can start to say is
well what other choices do I have and
and now if we we work with a typical
person and you say you have some agency
before you leave work and then your
agency doesn't return till you get home
right what are you going to do during
the day to keep the body moving right so
that it's easier to escape to your
afternoon class I think that's the the
thing and what youve just described is
what my wife would call A A movement-
rich environment how do I pepper the
environment with inputs so that I'm not
just in a a tiny movement language I
love that I want to go back to the
sitting on the ground should it be
painful should it be
sore one aspect of your physiology that
will not change doesn't have to change
is your range of motion as you get older
we should be able to maintain our range
of motion so what's interesting is that
if we suddenly confronted with tasks
that ask us to be in certain positions
that we're not comfortable with we're
going to be sore you bet you're going to
have to squeeze your butt and something
you said earlier like once I'm warmed up
I love that phrase right once I've had
my 27 supplements and my coffee and my
activation I've gotten into my sauna I
can do anything I feel great the real
question is should I have to do all that
stuff for high performance absolutely
but should I have to do all of this prep
to have native range of motion to have
Baseline range of motion probably
not I'd like to take a quick break and
acknowledge our sponsor ag1 ag1 is a
vitamin mineral probiotic drink that
also includes prebiotics and adaptogens
ag1 is designed to cover all of your
foundational nutritional needs and it
tastes great now I've been drinking ag1
since 2012 and I started doing that at a
time when my budget for supplements was
really Limited in fact I only had enough
money back then to purchase one
supplement and I'm so glad that I made
that supplement ag1 the reason for that
is even though I strive to eat most of
my foods from Whole Foods and minimally
processed foods it's very difficult for
me to get enough fruits vegetables
vitamins and minerals micronutrients and
adaptogens from food alone and I need to
do that in order to ensure that I have
enough energy throughout the day I sleep
well at night and keep my immune system
strong but when I take ag1 daily I find
that all aspects of my health my
physical health my mental health and my
performance both cognitive and physical
are better I know that because I've had
lapses when I didn't take ag1 and I
certainly felt the difference I also
notice and this makes perfect sense
given the relationship between the gut
microbiome and the brain that when I
regularly take ag1 which for me means a
serving in the morning or midm morning
and again later in the afternoon or
evening that I have more mental Clarity
and more mental energy if you'd like to
try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com
huberman to claim a special offer right
now they're giving away five free travel
packs and a year supply of vitamin D3 K2
again that's drink a1.com huberman to
claim that special
offer well as long as we're there I'm
just going to tell you what's worked
best for me in terms of warming up um
and I'd love to know your thoughts um
years ago I think it was uh Charles
poliquin post or something like that um
where it was suggested to do relatively
low repetition warm-up love it as
opposed to going in and doing you know
15 reps then 10 then eight or whatever
it is and I've found over the years
what's allowed me to get strongest and
stay strongest for me is to sure I'll go
in and do the first set of a movement
resistance training movement uh maybe
eight repetitions just to get some blood
flowing and remind my brain practice you
know what what the range of motion is
right then I'll do maybe just you know
five four two repetitions on of
subsequent three sets so five four and
then two repetition sets with heavier
loads and it's just to prepare my
nervous system for heavier loads and
then when I start my actual quote
unquote work sets I can get a lot more
real work done and this for me was like
spit in the face of everything I had
read everything i' had seen that you
need to higher repetition warm up and it
has allowed me to progress more or less
continuously over the decades that I've
been training and I'm not a natural
athlete I'm just not I've trained for a
long long time but I would never fall
under what you would call like natural
athlete I don't I have a low recovery
quotient all that stuff and so for me it
was like a shocker but it makes total
sense prepare the nervous system for the
work you're about to do and don't follow
some preconceived idea that you have to
do high repetition warmup or even
moderate repetition warmup and lo and
behold you get much stronger and if you
want to grow muscle you can grow more
muscle why haven't we heard more about
this why don't people in Fitness talk
more I know you do and please do talk
about the nervous system and the fact
that it's not just all about warming up
and getting blood flow it's really about
preparing the brain and spinal cord and
all the stuff in
there let's say couple variables there
what's your training age right if I'm
going to take a beginner and you and the
same thing we can make big jumps you and
I been we've deadlifted together a
decade ago like we can just go know our
bodies the patterns are well ingrained
our tissues have exposure here right
there's some things we can do so I love
that you're starting to see that what's
the minimal amount of warmup to to do
the task and on some days you may be
sore may be stiff and he takes a little
more time to go get right underneath
it one of the things I think we have
this opportunity to do is put play back
into warm-ups so one of the things is
that I I suspect and please correct me
if I'm wrong you don't find a lot of joy
in do these like wrote a the world's
greatest stretch why do the active like
it's not that fun so what let me talk
about my experience working with a team
at at Berkeley I have this shout out to
the Women's Water Polo team at Berkeley
who are my just total family these women
are incredible but I came into the sport
and looked around and I saw really
ineffective warm-ups that weren't a good
useage of time that didn't prepare us to
get into a fight in 20 minutes or 30
minutes later so if you went through
your warm-up and said I'm going to be in
a fight am I prepared for that or not
and that's a nice like rubric to say I'm
nervous system arousal I have a little
sweat on I've practiced right you know
you know I've touched some positions and
shapes but you know what I see is that
there's in the typical training session
there's a lot of work to get done so now
I think training is become very very
dense you know here's this piece here's
this piece now I do the successor work I
got to hit these these card and so the
warmup for me has been one of the last
places where I can get you to explore
new movements something you saw on the
internet play around if you came to my
gym you know or we came to my house now
I'd be like let's go through the
medicine ball for 5 minutes and there's
no wrong way but I want you to start to
explore speed I want you to explore
catch an object and going fast and what
we haven't done and I suspect I wouldn't
say that your warmup is the best way i'
say it's one way to get to the thing
that we want faster and potentially you
stop doing what didn't work and what
didn't serve you which I really want
people to understand is that if you're
not blind going through some program I
want you to say does this serve me
because my experience working now 20
years with the best teams and athletes
and organizations on the planet is
athletes do what work and they stop
doing what doesn't work isn't that
interesting
right so what I love is that you started
to get under heavy loads relatively
quickly in movements you had real
competency and exposure with yes because
what we want to do is come back to say
what's the least amount of work I can do
to have the biggest adaptation and 3
hours in the gym doesn't fit into your
life and it doesn't fit into the typical
person's life and theoretically you're
going to have to go do a sport so you're
going to have to recover from this Sport
and this training session right you were
like hey I can't even hand this high
volume you know it's a ding on me too I
can't handle the same high volume as my
friends can so wasting your time in
quotation marks with lots of high volume
sets of an empty barbell might have been
useful at some point and maybe it
doesn't serve you as well now or because
you have to put so many plates on that
bar that's just that's a warm up by
itself right that's not you walked a
mile to load those plates no that's not
an issue for me but that's a perfect
what you just said is a perfect
opportunity for me to mention something
that I've noticed which prompts a
question which is I noticed that I have
some asymmetry my right shoulder
naturally sits a little lower than my
left and whenever I get a little back
tweak it's always on the same side etc
etc I know this this varies for for
everybody and I noticed that I was
always um picking up the the weights and
racking them because I rerack my weights
like a grown-up um racking them on the
same side so I've made it a point now to
to switch up you know which side I which
side of my body I do them great um and
notice I'm significantly weaker on one
side of my body I mean not to the point
where where you know I have to use two
different sets of uh dumb or two
different dumbbells if I'm doing curls
or something but just noticing these
natural asymmetry starting to show up
because I'm a right-hander or who knows
or I I skateboarded so you know I've
spent a lot of my life early life with
my left foot forward and my right foot
pushing and as a consequence there are a
lot of asymmetry so what I've tried to
do is correct those asymmetries in the
between movement movements but also to
stagger my stance during curls and then
and switch it each each time or maybe
even overemphasize the weaker side I
have no professional training in any of
this I've just found that it's made for
better posture more more evenly
distributed strength and I must say all
of that is based on teachings that I
read in your books and through
conversations with you about hey we have
these natural imbalances and there are
little things that we can do that take
moments that can correct those
imbalances so if if you would could you
um sort of expand on the number and type
of imbalances that you most commonly see
and some ways for people to remedy
remedy them excuse me Let's uh if we
just took the word imbalance and put it
to the side for a second because it's
sort of a non-specific term like are we
testing your hamstring to your quad like
what what what's the ideal ratio here
like if you're a professional pitcher I
hope your arm right arm looks different
than your left arm right but what we can
say
is number one imbalances don't
necessarily cause pain let's let's be
clear about that we should be using our
time in the gym
as training to find deficiencies and
blind spots in our patterns in our skill
in our you know and our our brains
feeling comfortable with a certain
movement and what you just hit was that
it's boy it's really easy to get a lot
of variability just doing the things I
want to do anyway so now I'm in a tandem
stance I I skate left foot forward right
but you know suddenly that's my dominant
stance if you're going to ask me to do
anything of consequence I'm going to
adopt that stance but suddenly I get to
have some exposure here so what's the
point of the gym what's the point of
training just to work on some
cardiorespiratory output you know that
the science says is it to move into play
is it to you know if the brain's a you
know problem solving machine let's give
it some problems to solve so you
suddenly have a new problem to solve and
I would even say that weakness isn't
even the right idea just like here is a
a pattern that I'm not as effective at
as efficient at so when we go into the
gym sort of with this great curiosity
then it's a really rich place and really
frankly the only safe place because
there isn't contact and Sport and we're
not fighting and dancing and moving and
and we can really do this controlled
formal movement where we can really see
inputs and outputs I explained my
mother-in-law a long time ago what was
happening when we were developing our
model to understand movement and I I was
and I explained it and she was like Oh
you mean it makes the invisible visible
that's right is that this is a place to
understand how your range of motion is
changing how your skills are changing
right over the course of a season or the
course of you know something going on in
your life a season in your life suddenly
you're like wow my left hip is a little
tight or my left shoulders my internal
rotation is going away hard to see when
you're swimming really easy to see when
we dumbbell snatch right and what we're
trying to do then is take the gym not
only have it be a stimulus for
adaptation but have it be a really great
place to uncover changes in my movement
changes in expression of that movement
and so really what you see again if I
just do this one thing over and over
again that's patterning that's
repetition that's practice right and
what you've done is just said hey let me
change my brain let me open the door
handle with my left side and become
coming into the gym with that Curiosity
means that we can have seven bottom
lines working on your fascia we're
working on these Energy Systems we're
working on these movement skills but
simultaneously we can have fun we can
work on understanding our range of I so
for me I think it's easier to say let's
let's frame Mobility as do here's the my
definition do you have access to
normative range of motion the range of
motion every physician every physical
therapist every chiro agrees on shoulder
it's 180 degrees of flexion so for those
listening This Is Lifting your arm above
head so you can bring your your hand
basically you know above the the center
of your head and what you can see right
now is Andrew has his elbow bent his hip
head TI to the side is internally
rotated he's solving the problem which
is what his brain is saying
compensation if you want to use the word
compensation I want to put that on you
but what I'd say is that's an incomplete
position doesn't mean you have pain
doesn't mean you're not the world
champion but it means we may have some
latent capacity we could Chase and the
next question for me then is what is it
that's missing potentially in your
training that we're not having this
exposure we're not doing enough close
grip hanging we're not doing seesaw
press right where the arm is straight up
we're always gripping on a barbell right
I'm not handling enough dumbbells or CLE
Bells overhead and then we can say well
do I need some position transfer
exercises Mobility work to restore that
so we can you use it again and then more
importantly how does that turn up for
you in a way that impacts your sport or
your job that's what's really
interesting does that make sense yeah so
what I'm hearing is that when we go into
the gym or wherever we do our resistance
training work that we should think about
it as a place to yes perform to exceed
our previous um you know reps and sets
and yeah because that's part of fun and
easy to measure hard to see are you
getting better at soccer I don't know
but I put another K on my bench today
like that's fun uh Lex fredman who of
course everybody knows from The Lex
Freedman podcast um likes to make fun of
uh Americans cuz he's Russian but he's
actually American now um for being
Meatheads because we like to spend so
much time in gyms working out as opposed
to doing sports and I I assure him that
I've also done and do Sports now but uh
he likes to make that point and I think
I think it's a fair one in that uh well
he's a Brazilian jiu-jitsu guy so um in
any event um the gym is also a place for
diagnosis to to diagnose where we don't
have as much range of motion as we could
um and you know that's very helpful I
think for people to hear because most
people are are time limited they don't
have if they're getting their you know
two or three resistance training
workouts per week plus two or three
cardiovascular training workouts and
they're listening to petera so trying to
hang from a bar for you know 90 seconds
or more and they're you know doing some
farmer carries and they're doing their
Zone too and they're throwing on a
weight vest I me you know and they got
either fidgeting under their desk you
know at some point you can start to
understand why people are like whoa this
is starting to become overwhelming what
you're talking about is going and doing
your typical workout but paying
attention to where some for lack of a
better word I'll call them asymmetries
or not full range of motion being
expressed where that might be happening
I love I keep coming back to this but
this thing about getting down under the
ground for 30 minutes each night while
watching TV or while maybe even while
eating dinner while talking to your
family or partner I think it's fantastic
it also gives me an excuse to push the
the sofas off to the side of the room
because I have this weird uh neuroticism
about furniture in the middle of the
room so I'm imagining getting mats on
down in the down on the floor of the
living room and suddenly we're not
programming another thing that's I think
one of the things that has happened and
it's a good thing it's it's a feature of
the system strength conditioning the
last 20 years has become very
sophisticated so Juliet and I my wife
and CEO open our gym in
2005 this was the CrossFit gym the
that's rightful location 21st CrossFit
in the world early but we couldn't buy a
kettle bell in San Francisco we had to
drive to Santa Cruz that says a lot
about San Francisco I can say that
because I'm from the bay area but you
they there was one place in San Cruz
that sold him played against sports that
import Ed these Russian kettle bells
thank you pav and we had to make this
Trek down to buy them so the fitness I
think we I bought my first pair of
Olympic lifting shoes out of the back of
someone's car like a drug deal like
Olympic lifting shoes yeah like you just
couldn't buy them old shoes no like
actually an Olympic lifting shoe with
like a heel but like you can buy those
at like three different stores in Malibu
right now like you go right over there
there's it's we have normal you can buy
cleall at Target so the the world has
become much more sophistic ated um
sometimes like overhead Squad is a good
example fantastic diagnostic tool tells
us a lot so bar held overhead squat down
super simple all you have to do is have
normal range of motion and your your
joints and tissues well it helps jul
like to say I was bendy before I was big
but you know the idea here though is
let's go ahead and also put skill back
into this but most people weren't
overhead
squatting you know at all it wasn't part
of their language now everyone knows
what an overhead squat is
right Dan John CrossFit all the Olympic
lifters have been doing this forever but
what we are seeing is that the the
Natural Evolution of fitness and
strength and conditioning is that we've
become we've gotten really decorative in
our room so we create this room that's
just every inch has a knickknack has an
assistance this is my tib Rays this is
my neck thing it's a very decorative
experience and instead of asking what
was essential in terms of energy systems
and positions that I can train so that I
could go use those credits you know for
lack of a better word it's Fitness has
become very recursive I have this zone
two so I can do more zone two so I can
more zone two or I have pull-ups because
they be get more pull-ups instead of
well how did that make you swim what's
the minimum amount of time we can spend
in the gym so that you can go Express
that Lex is right in a sport or an
activity and look there are times in
your life for the gym is the only thing
you got you know Julet and I when we had
two kids and a baby or two kids in our
our businesses we did the 10 10 10 at 10
which is like 10 air squats 10 cball
swings 10 pull-ups at 10 p.m. for 10
minutes and I was like Elite my fitness
is Elite you do that every day well I
just did it when I could do it right
because that's all I could fit in so you
know I think what's happened is we have
now sold people this idea that Fitness
happens in a one-h hour block and if
it's not an hour you know then it's not
worth doing and if you kept a bar loaded
in your garage you could walk out there
and do sets in between making dinner you
kept a c on your kitchen you could do
pavles four swings on the minute for 20
minutes and at least have some exposure
loading so a long way around the barn of
saying I want to protect your gym time
because it's really sacred amazing time
where you can have fun explore ranges
get strong get jacked feel great about
yourself interact with your friends and
what I don't want to do is encroach
anymore on that magic time because we
have a lot to get done in the gym
physiologically if we're going to
compete against these other teams we're
going to beat Stanford we're going to
need to really maximize that time in the
gym so that means we need to push out
some of these other behaviors so we're
not stacking them in and they're eroding
the time we could be squatting or
benching or cleaning or running or
sprinting or cutting or playing you
mentioned warming up with play which I
think is a wonderful concept um and
presumably brings about more Dynamic
movement 100% um and another reason I
like it is that I loathe warming up
aside from the types of warm-ups that I
just described
and I hate it and I'm beginning to
realize that um the way I've been
training even though it's been um I
would I would say useful and and uh
successful for where I've been uh I've
been thinking a lot about what I want to
do heading into the new year this is not
like a New Year's episode this this is a
you know Evergreen because it's you um
but we have a new year coming A lot of
people are are going to naturally Mark
the time during and after the holidays
as a transition point and if one want
wanted to start to not necessarily
completely re restructure their Fitness
but wanted to start incorporating a few
things so we've got sitting down in the
evening for 30 minutes we've got
incorporating play into the warmup what
would that look like are we taking a
tennis ball and bouncing it off the
ground we setting some rule in playing a
game sure what if I'm alone am I um am I
playing a little little handball type
game against the wall absolutely see
something on the Internet want to learn
a new skill this is the time to put it
in uh I'm going to talk about my
brilliant friend David W
he has something called rope flow that
he created and it's just a piece of
climbing rope and he will talk about all
the things that will do for me I get a
thousand PNF patterns I tie my upper
body into my lower my upper body into my
lower body I get you explain PNF sorry
acronym sorry sorry everyone that's a a
model of facilitating movement developed
at Kaiser Vallejo It Is by not and cabat
I think uh maybe I'm getting confused
using those and anyway the the bottom
line is this how do we help the body
restore Movement by using its own
positional awareness got it so if you've
ever done a hamstring stretch where
someone holds you and you resist that
contract relax is a style it's a
technique born out of PNF got it sorry
to interrup okay so he's got these ropes
and and so suddenly like I use this with
all my teams is suddenly I'm spinning
ropes I'm getting thousands of
evolutions of the wrist turning the
elbow turning the shoulder turning I'm
generating speed in weird positions that
would be vulnerable and not as effective
at high load high stakes I get to twist
I can tie my eyes into it I can develop
my stance and in five minutes of messing
around you're like H I feel good and
we've added some speed to that right
because a lot of the warm-ups I see
people do I'm like hey there was no
speed you know what sport is speed and
you haven't added any velocity to your
training so where are we going to do
that I love this um I'm excited to Dave
Dave wack does a lot of amazing things
his rope is a foundational piece of mind
if you work with me and you have
shoulder pain and neck pain you're going
to get my shoulder spin up or David WX
rope flow every day that's part of our
our homework what are we going to do to
give you exposure and restore what
you're supposed to do with your body so
walk into the gym use the bathroom
hydrate whatever it is you need to do
and then five to 10 minutes of some Play
Type Dynamic activity throw a medicine
ball around jump on a mini trampoline
pick up a barbell do a complex do some
breath hold work this a perfect place to
lay on all the breath hold work I think
they call it dry face breath holding
right this this Dynamic apnea work where
you're basically holding your breath so
for example with our teams we try to I
try to have this is a magic number
seven sort of hypoxic events where we do
something on a breathhold until the
athlete has a crisis and has to breathe
and part of that is I want to get the
brain ready for these high CO2 levels
right and I want to challenge
respiration and it's so easy get on the
bike here's something everyone can do
for five minutes I want you to take a
10-second inhale on the bike hold your
breath as long as you can when the bomb
goes off in your
face recover nose only start at the next
one at the next minute and what you're
going to see is wow that was really
uncomfortable really
psychologically preparing myself to get
into a fight that came from the French
free divers one of the coaches I was
working with was like here's something
we used to do with our with our French
free divers I was like this is so good
McKenzie lar Hamilton Wim hooff the
people who've been exposing us to
Dynamic apnea work is amazing but that's
another example of something I can do
instead of mindlessly just being on and
I got to get a sweat like let's go ahead
and just layer in play and
destruction I love it do not lay on the
ground of foam roll let me say that
again do not lay on the ground FAL that
is the worst way to get ready for a
fight ever I'd like to take a quick
break and thank one of our sponsors
function I recently became a function
member after searching for the most
comprehensive approach to lab testing
while I've long been a fan of blood
testing I really wanted to find a more
in-depth program for analyzing blood
urine and saliva to get a full picture
of my heart health my hormone status my
immune system regulation my metabolic
function my vitamin and mineral status
and other critical areas of my overall
health and vitality function not only
provides testing of over 100 biomarkers
key to physical IAL and mental health
but it also analyzes these results and
provides insights from Top Doctors on
your results for example in one of my
first tests with function I learned that
I had two high levels of mercury in my
blood this was totally surprising to me
I had no idea prior to taking the test
function not only helped me detect this
but offered medical doctor informed
insights on how to best reduce those
mercury levels which included limiting
my tuna consumption because I'd been
eating a lot of tuna while also making
an effort to eat more leafy green and
supplementing with Knack and acetyl
cysteine both of which can support
glutathione production and
detoxification and worked to reduce my
mercury levels comprehensive lab testing
like this is so important for health and
while I've been doing it for years I've
always found it to be overly complicated
and expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the test done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function health.com huberman function
currently has a weight list of over
250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to huberman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to function
today's episode is also brought To Us by
eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart
mattress covers with cooling Heating and
sleep tracking capacity I've spoken many
times before on this podcast about the
critical need for us to get adequate
amounts of quality sleep each night
that's truly the Foundation of all
mental health physical health and
performance and one of the best ways to
ensure that you get a great night's
sleep is to control the temperature of
your sleeping environment and that's
because in order to fall and stay deeply
asleep your body temperature actually
has to drop by about 1 to 3° and in
order to wake up feeling refreshed and
energized your body temperature actually
has to increase about 1 to 3 degrees
eight sleep makes it incredibly easy to
control the temperature of your sleeping
environment by allowing you to control
the temperature of your mattress cover
at the beginning middle and end of the
night I've been sleeping on an eight
sleep mattress cover for nearly 4 years
now and it has completely transformed
and improved the quality of my sleep
eight sleep has now launched their
newest generation of the Pod cover the
Pod 4 ultra the Pod 4 ultra has improved
cooling and heating capacity higher
Fidelity sleep tracking technology and
even has snoring detection that will
automatically lift your head a few
degrees to improve your airf flow and
stop your snoring if you'd like to try
an eights Sleep mattress cover go to
eights sleep.com huberman to save up to
$350 off their pod 4 ultra eight sleep
currently ships in the USA Canada UK
select countries in the EU and Australia
again that's 8sleep.com
huberman somehow I we could talk about
how it's not a coincidence um you became
synonymous with foam rolling it be
synonymous with you that's okay it's uh
I mean it's not it's okay with me they
weren't saying about me but I was about
to say it's okay you know anytime
somebody um goes public facing and
starts to to try and educate people you
know people there are certain things
that are sticky they have like high
salance like um yes I like to get into a
cold plunge but how I how Andrew
huberman became associated with cold
plunging or buying a gold blung is is
wild I mean sure I own one and you know
this sort of thing and I think they're
great for shifting your state um but
it's hardly the Cornerstone of my life
or or my um existence but I love it I I
use it but I think foam rolling I think
looked different enough from what people
had not seen before and it you know
these things just they have a stickiness
to them who who knows why um what is the
deal with foam rolling is is there
utility to foam rolling absolutely um is
there a wrong way to do it no but
there's a way that's not a great use of
your time okay right so what we're all
looking at is we have fin out amount of
time and what's my goal to quickly touch
my whole body you know what what are we
trying to do so if I was using soft
tissue mobilization and or using a rooll
or or a ball or something what's my goal
here well I think in the research is
very clear it can help with pain it can
restore range of motion again very clear
and I want to point out sort of one of
my research friends Brent Brook Bush the
brook Bush Institute has incredible
summaries of muscular skeletal care
Brent is a genius and if you go on his
site there's a little hourglass and you
can search like trigger points and
you'll see all of the Deep dive research
analysis of the meta research like you
you'll be like okay this is really
excellent and and it is tricky because
you know what doesn't work for my body
or wasn't a good use for a time now is
useless and it's easy to shout on the
internet so what's our goal if I was in
pain and I was about to
exercise a a quick two or three minute
intervention working on let's call it
desensitization of the tissues let's
let's be mechanism agnostic for a second
and say that's a really low level to
entry safe highly effective way for you
to suddenly feel better so we create a
window of opportunity to move that's
really cool I love that no physical
therapist in the room no one went blind
you didn't dislocate right so that could
be a really excellent use of some soft
tissue work the same way a boxer would
go or MMA fighter or the Olympic lifters
in China they have people who are giving
non-threatening input to the body to
tell the brain it's safe or to rehydrate
something or get some not again is it
just stimulus so that the brain says
it's safe sure are we restoring how the
tissues slide and glide sure a lot of
times I think if you look at any of the
mobility work I'll just put r large
really comes down to just doing a couple
things most of them are just isometrics
so we have a lot of isometrics which
everyone can agree is good stuff and we
do a lot of tempo work that's really
just moving slowly through range it just
may be that I'm using a different tool
to have that isometric stimulus or that
that Tempo moving slowly stimulus so we
like to say hey let's use
mobilizations mobilizing the tissues why
are we doing it what are we trying to do
well pain is a good reason and again
multifactoral highly subjective why do I
have pain while I got in a fight with my
wife and I didn't eat and I you know
twisted my knee back in Vietnam and you
know who knows right but what are the
inputs that I have to self sooth and
desensitize and it turns out a ball and
a roller is a really good one so I can
use those to help myself feel better did
that solve the problem did that solve
two weeks of shitty sleep did that solve
my poor nutrition and lack of fiber that
solve the fact that I don't feel safe in
this environment no but it got me a
window of opportunity where I can go
feel better in my body is anyone against
that no okay so what we can also say is
hey this would be a great way to do what
restore your range of motion a one tool
and a system of tools to get you to do
what have normative range again right
for whatever reason your last are super
stiff you're doesn't again it's more
complicated than that but sometimes it's
not more complicated than that and if I
just get you getting some input into
there maybe I can restore that range of
motion or create a window where you can
go use it
again lastly I would say is it it's a
wonderful tool to decrease Doms delayed
onset muscle soreness so in the evening
you blew out your quads do a little soft
tissue work and what you'll see is maybe
that's blood flow maybe it's
non-threatening input maybe it's just
massage Maybe maybe it's just the
parasympathetic input that massage has
touch right just downregulates maybe
those are the reasons I feel better but
the bottom line is is that a good use of
your time yes or all techniques on the
rul the same no right and I think that's
where we've lost our minds is that if
you you just rolled up and down in your
Cal didn't do anything I'm like yeah
well you just what are you doing right
what if I rolled side to side and so
suddenly we can start to layer in some
really complex thinking around this how
about this you
you have a roller out and I put my calf
on there and I start rolling side to
side should that be
uncomfortable I'm guessing you're going
to say no but
um any anytime I've used a roller
anytime I've used a roller I'm like man
that hurts I don't that sucks I well I
mean I don't mind it like it's not like
the kind of it's not like level level
eight pain or anything it's just it's
sort of like it feels very localized
Even If the roll is a big fat Costello
the Bulldog size rollert it feels like
someone's kind of kneading down in
between my muscle fibers and then I
start to think maybe I just have like
low fiber density and if I were Mark
Bell or something then this would feel
comfortable but you know I I always feel
like the roller is going down to the
boat face of lfd blue fiber density so
you know what I think we can do is let's
establish some some some guideliner
people cuz this is this is one of the
ways that we can feel better on our home
without bourbon without ibuprofen
without THC like we need to give people
some tools that don't like that aren't
just without having to buy a sauna if
you can afford one great but not every I
mean this whole thing with sauna love
saunas but you know well until very
recently in my life like I couldn't
afford a sauna until very recently you
know even as a 10-year professor at
Stanford I'll just say that right you
can actually be angry at your parents
for not giving you a sauna no you know
when I was a kid my dad and I used to go
to the Y in the evening sometimes when I
was little and I'd shoot baskets or he
would he would lift weights Nautilus
machines back then and then um we get
and then we'd sit in the sauna or there
was aot you had a different set of
trauma traumatic experience of sitting
in the S the why no actually I learned
how um I learned how how men uh I
learned how men uh over over 40 spoke in
19 855 there you go there you go there
you
go if everyone had a roller and a ball
there was a lot of dysfunction and
discomfort we can manage if you push on
a tissue we expect that tissue to be
painless to compression or un not
uncomfortable to compression again don't
pain is a weird word I don't want to set
that up but you shouldn't be
uncomfortable to compression what's nice
is that if I push on something all I'm
doing is just creating an isometric it's
just a vector isometric instead of
pulling an isometric through the length
of the tissue I'm putting it in a
different vector and angle so that would
just be one I could start there and if
it was uncomfortable well guess what now
I can get my my nervous system involved
so I can teach my brain that it's safe
to create a contraction here so what do
I do just Flex Flex it hold it for 4
seconds this is very basic I realize but
for many people they're either already
foam rolling and doing it incorrectly or
they're not foam rolling we want them to
do it correctly so if I understand
correctly it's quote unquote okay to
flex the muscle that you have in contact
with the foam roller while you're
rolling if I find something that's
uncomfortable or stiff or doesn't feel
like my other side I'm going to stop
found a place to work I'm going to build
take a big inhale so I take a 4 second
inhale I want to teach myself that I
need to be able to breathe in this
position my one of my you know friends
Greg Cook is like if you can't breathe
in position you don't own a position you
know that sounds very iang guard too but
what we're going to do is we're going to
say it's okay to breathe here and I'm
going to contract here and then I'm
going to slowly relax and soften that's
Tempo that's moving slowly and I can
handle higher loads and what'll end up
happening is if I repeat that cycle two
or three times guess what my brain
desensitizes that changes range of
motion my brain suddenly is like that's
not a problem anymore so we just move on
and in two or three cycles of that
contraction breath hold long exhale that
starts to sound familiar right how do I
come down long exhales I'm not trying to
spin up I'm trying to say this is this
is safe I've done that with my breath
I've done that with contraction I'm just
getting input in just just touch to my
body especially on parts that maybe
don't bark at me very often right people
are shocked to learn that sometimes when
they have knee pain how stiff their
quads are and we can test it load it
feel it palpate it and I'm like those
things are just stiff and when we
unstiffen them whatever technique you
want to use restore sliding surfaces get
neural input in there we create range of
motion suddenly we change a motion
dynamic improved efficiency the brain
says hey that's no longer a threat or
we're experiencing that as a new pattern
or position that' be enough to reduce
your pain but pain isn't the only reason
we're mobilizing we're mobilizing so
that we can reduce session cost so we
can work out harder the next day and
keep an eye on our minimums of our of
our range of motion love this and um
another just very basic question because
I'll be honest I haven't foam rolled
much in my life um and and it doesn't
have to be a big fo everyone sometimes
those big white those are pool noodles
right that's what it was for I think
like made in Colleen Texas is like a
manufacturing byproduct and someone's
like we could put these in the pool and
then some physical therapist is like
sweet like that thing's way too big and
too hard and too square and too soft
like there's a whole bunch of things
like sometimes you need an elbow
sometimes you need a forearm sometimes
you need a thumb so you can have much
smaller diameter I'm a much bigger fan
of smaller diameter rollers I just think
they fit your body better thank you for
that um also very helpful um let's say I
want to quote unquote loosen up or um or
move out some potential soreness or
soreness from a given U muscle uh like
the quadricep does it make sense to
start in the middle of that muscle the
top like does it can you work above and
below the the the knee um are all of
those things going to help I realize
this is a a much Fuller discussion than
we can have in a few minutes like how
should I approach I'm like okay you know
my my uh quads are a little sore my or
my back is sore do I go straight to the
back or do I start with another with
another body region I don't think it
matters what I want interested is inputs
and outputs right what I'm really
interested in is what did you do to make
yourself feel better did you just hope
it would just go away and then when day
it didn't and then you had to activate
the emergency medical system so let's
define a couple things what is an injury
this is a great question injury for us
is there's a clear mechanism of
mechanical trauma there's a bone
sticking out of your leg Andrew time to
go to the hospital injured right you're
injured right I heard a snap and a
pop yikes I have night sweats dizziness
fever vomiting nausea unaccounted for
weight loss weight gain changes in my
bladder bowel function problem my cough
sneeze or swallow those are red flags
you're not sore you're sick let me
introduce you to the doctor again right
if your pain or dysfunction is so bad
you can't occupy a role in your family
can't occupy a role in society can't
occupy a role in the
team that's emergency problem that is a
medical condition that needs medical so
you come in today you tweak your back it
may need we need to activate EMS need to
go to the hospital we need to get
because it's so severe you can't do your
job everything else I want to call
non-injury I want to be very specific
with the language he is we call it an
incident it actually comes out of this
um sort of language there's a a guy here
here's the long way around the barn I
read this great book called Deep
survival which is Lawrence Gonzalez
which is about why people end up in
survival situations and it's a literally
a lot about like we got away with it for
a long time and then I just didn't have
a you know I ended up two miles out sea
I've done it a million times and this
time right that's it but there was a
footnote in there from a book called
normal accidents by Charles pero who's
recently passed on I emailed Charles
because I was like this has blown my
mind he calls A lot of times will have
trivial events in non-trivial systems so
he's taking systems think thinking he's
looking at complex system organization
and his idea is that an accident a
normal accident is actually just
expression of the system if you gave the
system long enough to express itself the
inputs and outputs are so tightly
coupled that it's difficult to see what
causes what and how they influence each
other that's the body so your stiff
shoulder isn't a problem until you fall
in the ice and then that stiff shoulder
suddenly can't take over pressure and
overhead and you tear your rotator cuff
off at high speed you'd say Oh Black
Swan event super crazy but that's
actually just a normal expression of
that shoulder system if we gave it
enough time to express itself so he has
sort of like incident an accident so an
incident is I want us to start to think
about incident level problems are pain
loss of range of motion numbness tingle
we're becoming curious why is the brain
sending me the signal it's pain is a
request for change so when if we ask our
athletic populations I just did this
with a hundred kids I'm like how many of
you are pain free 100 high school kids
two hands go up two high school high
school so what we're suddenly realizing
is that pain is very much a part of the
athletic condition The Human Experience
certainly the athletic experience you've
been in pain a billion times and still
gone out and done the thing so what we
we want to do is say pain is not always
a medical problem it's a medical problem
when the the time we're saying how are
you using Fitness training as a
scaffolding to understand nutrition
hydration soft tissue work
desensitization reperfusion of the
tissues so that's what we're trying to
do in sport and training is Empower
people to say what's going on with my
body and why don't I feel the way I do
or why does something hurt and why can't
I remedy that and then when I run out of
ideas let me go get some help so the the
rolling um we can think of as a way to
you know move out soreness prepare us
for more work the next day or something
like that but is it fair to say that we
can also use the roller as a diagnostic
tool sure like if I'm feeling like an
unusual amount of of um not unusual but
let's just say um that I'm feeling like
a wuss cuz when I when I lie down on
that roller and I kind like you know
like slide back and forth like I've seen
the videos of you and other folks doing
that I'm like man that really hurts does
that necessar mean something's wrong
okay no it mean it means that for
whatever reason those tissues become
sensitized and that your brain is
interpreting that stiffness as a threat
and it's reading it as pain right and
some people they don't have that they
just their tissues feel like this but
they don't have pain when they do that
but that's not a normal tissue you
should be like layers of warm silk
sliding over steel Springs and what
you're seeing is that what is that what
quality tissue should absolutely that
layers silk over steel Springs layers of
silk over steel Springs and what we see
is that we are loading and training at
such high intensity it's in such density
now that our tissues get stiff I'm just
going to hang stiffness as for whatever
reason FIB high fibrotic high density of
tissues whatever reason the tissues
don't behave the way the joint system
should right and that's a problem
because my training shouldn't mitigate
or attenuate or change my range of
motion it can but now how am I keeping
an eye on those changes or as you said
earlier as I do a sport and I start to
do a sport and specialize I'm throwing
throwing or I swim or I kick on one side
how can I start to identify as my body
is changing and adapting that sport so I
can drag myself back to a sort of a
greater Readiness and that's one of the
reasons that that mobilization tool is
such a powerful tool again however you
want to do it I think it's useful for
for us when we have we I came up with
this thing called the D2 R2 model
because the other Ray was taken R2-D2 so
the first order of business is I want to
desensitize if something hurts something
hurts let's desensitize it I can do that
all different ways scraping is powerful
desensitization isometrics can be really
useful uh rolling bfr can give me
desensitization there's so many
techniques to make my body restriction
yeah Blood Flow Restriction so that no
longer I'm my brain is perceiving this
as a threat because if you're pain you
cannot generate the same amount of force
or wattage or output and your brain is
going to start to truncate it's going to
start to Lop off your movement Solutions
right it's just going to happen so we
want our we want everyone to be saying
hey we don't panic we have pain we just
treat it like another diagnostic tool
then second d right we desensitize and
then we ask is this something that be
decongested so decongestion means that
often times tissues that are swollen
become more easily sensitized tissues
that are swollen and congested don't
heal as fast if you have a swollen ankle
those collagen fibers will not knit
together as fast as a right if you have
a joint that's swollen or a tissue
that's swollen your brain will shut down
Force production in and around that
joint system is swelling an emergency no
is a swollen joint environment really
healthy for the the integrity and
surface of the joint no we want to
manage that but often times when someone
comes in and the tissue is congested
right just sometimes we say swelling and
we think ankle right only capsular but
here we have if you've ever flown on an
airplane and had cankles those that's
congested tissue if we manage that
congestion if we move those lymphatics
along we muscle contraction drives the
lymphatic drainage the the lymph system
is the sewage system of the body
decongested tissues often express less
pain and what we find is that in broken
bones or soft tissue injuries if we can
better evacuate that swelling better
evacuate that congestion not only do we
see you now healing at the rate of a
human being we're not rate limiting the
healing but also we can help you manage
that sensitivity then the third one is
can we get some blood flow in there like
H you said I once I warm up I feel great
welcome to the power of blood flow
tissues become hydrated we're shifting
blood from the stomach all the things
that happens right all that Venus return
is coming back on board but suddenly we
see that if we get something pumped full
of blood it tends to be less painful and
that's a really easy so if I have an old
Orthopedic thing maybe I spend a few few
minutes just getting a huge quad pump on
the leg extension machine then I go
squat heavy right so I have
desensitization decongestion reperfusion
whatever tool you want to use for these
is fair game with me just is how I've
come to kind of conceptualize these
different tools and the last one is
restore do you have full range of motion
full normal in that joint yes or no
because that's the last thing that we
talk about because you're still able to
perform your sport at college or do your
job but we're not seeing how inaccess
your ability to not access that range of
motion maybe limiting your movement
choice and potentially overloading a
tissue and a by making it work in a less
effective manner or even just leading to
progressively worse and worse posture
sure which is probably well Define
define posture form me because I think
that's a really great place to start
right yeah I can Define bad posture as
when you catch yourself in a in a
reflection and you realize wow I'm
starting to I'm starting to look more
like a c I love than than a than a not
that's so great you the question is is
that a matter of Aesthetics or pain well
uh certainly for me it's not pain but
you know I it's not becoming injury I
notice that um it's not becoming I I
notice that unless I pay attention to my
posture while sitting unless I do a um
you know like Bridge my fingers together
and pull my my chin back a few times a
day that I'm just naturally starting to
tip over forward towards my text
messages that aren't even in my hands
right now and I think this is you know
the the younger generation I mean now
that I'm 49 I can talk like like that
right I mean it's St you the
1900s they are late 1900s exactly
they're they're starting to look like a
they're shaped like a sea that it's um
and I'm a big believer in uh people
especially men doing neck work I feel
like like if if you especially how about
especially people doing that work yeah
well here's the thing anytime I I'm
happy to go go there with this one um
maybe even at the risk of being
Politically Incorrect anytime I've
suggested that women also do neck workor
they say no you should see my goalie
daughter because for every pound
stronger your neck is your reduction in
concussion risk drops huge a pound thank
you so we keep the iron neck by the door
and she walks in and there's a we have a
video in our family where she's doing
her iron neck train she looks at me
she's like Dad this is why I don't have
a boyfriend thank you sorry Caroline but
that's the way it goes right cuz she's
like look at me I look like an idiot but
she loves having a big strong neck that
doesn't can take the shot from the ball
yeah listen I wish everyone would train
their neck I had I had an accident where
I fell off a off a roof walked away from
it my neck was sore but I heard it and
felt it and I was like oh goodness but
it was actually from skateboarding stuff
and falling and that I started training
my neck years ago and realized that wow
when I train my neck I'm one of the few
people in my TR age cohort that doesn't
complain about shoulder pain now maybe I
don't have full range of of motion um
maybe I'm hanging out with the wrong
people but anytime I see a somebody with
really broad shoulders where their neck
is is really inside of their jawline it
looks like a head was placed on the
wrong long action fig your body I just
want to go over to them and say listen a
it's aesthetically ridiculous it it
looks like one of those flip books in
the kids where you can change the head
the body and the and the legs to be
different animals um more seriously it's
a hazard because it's your upper spine
it's clearly not in line with the rest
of your your strength profile and the
other one is the more incentive based
thing is Hey listen if you train your
neck everything else gets stronger and
your head and your brain is going to be
safer and as a neuroscientist they
usually listen to the last piece so I I
so I'm so glad we're talking about this
I I do Bridges I know that they can be
risky with tongue in the roof of my
mouth I like I do Bridges to the back
and then I I do have a four-way neck
machine or I use a plate uh Jeff
Cavalier's got a great video of how to
do this that we can link too how to do
it safely you got to you got to close
the Chain by having a hand on the ground
this kind of thing to do it safely but
I've just found that neetwork also
serves posture it posture serves the
ability to make eye contact when you
have those things we call conversations
with people in real life and I do think
it these things stack up to we won't
call it like psychological confidence
but the ability to meet somebody you
know like firm handshake you know trying
to crush the other person's hand look
people in the eye stand up straight
whatever your height these things really
matter in subtle ways or not so subtle
ways I think that I do feel like like
yes that the younger generation and the
older generation they they sort of drop
they kind of drop out of certain
Elements of Life if you're looking down
at the ground at your phone all the time
you can't look people in the eye you're
posturally not right you're in pain
you're not as strong as you could be I
mean these things stack up to being um
like in a in an aquarium full of fish um
you're becoming the fish in the
background that's like you know like was
kind of sickly and the other fish are
getting all the the good stuff and you
know if you define posture as like the
Latin word route is position so we're
really saying is I have good position I
have bad position who I have bad
position one of the ways I think we've
lost the narrative a little bit is we
try to give people these extrinsic cues
to correct their posture shoulders
backing down check your tint like so all
of a sudden you're like when am I going
to be a human being and how do I
practice this when I'm doing a complex
skill so the organization of your body
the organization of your spine
particularly really is a reflection of
your movement habits your behaviors your
self-identity there's a lot of things in
there right you didn't get the job you
won the you got the number from Juliet
or your sleep deprived you and I'm going
to call myself out people are going to
do there many times on this podcast when
I go and I look at the because I do
listen to the podcast trying and see
places I can improve Etc um and I'll be
like wow my posture I'm like hunched
over and I think to myself and I'll go
you just reflecting my posture no no and
I track my sleep so you know I'll go
back and look I'll be like yeah I wasn't
sleeping as well those days or or what
whatever it is right I I mean I think
that we're we are all guilty of not
paying enough attention to our posture
so what we can do is we could Define
posture is there is a median range of
the joint positioning where we
simultaneously have most access to our
physiology right and I'll explain that
little more but also those shapes aren't
associated with increased pain risk and
increased injury risk which is real the
research does bear that that there are
positions and shapes that lead to less
effective movement and more likely to
experience pain it's probabilistic it's
not guaranteed it's there more likely so
one of the things that I I think you
could you could understand is hey do you
want to have access to all of the
Machinery so go ahead and slouch go
ahead with me and then just turn over
your shoulder how far can you turn yeah
now very far now watch this get into a
position where you take a huge breath
get to the biggest position you take the
biggest
breath okay so that's a pretty rocking
shape now turn your head goes further so
by you being queued can you adopt a
shape an organization of your trunk that
allowed you to ventilate a little bit
more effectively you completely change
and reorganized your structure which led
to an improvement and output so when I'm
working with people there's only two
things I really can wrap my head around
one is do you have normative range of
motion yes or no what are the tools we
have to restore that and improve that
and does that expression give us greater
biomotor output because those are
objective measures when biom motor
output I mean range of motion Force
production power right I see that in I
can express the phys physiology in a
unique way that makes me you know more
effective and that is why you'll see
suddenly we have this definition that is
maintaining the physiology and aspects
I'm not going to have as good shoulder
flexion with my arm over ah head as when
I'm was sitting up taller or in a
position where I can take a bigger
breath and I think that's what's really
great because that gets us away from
good posture bad posture into hey that
position doesn't serve you as well in
these circumstances and in this position
I'm working with the par rescue team in
the Air Force the number one reason they
were having back injuries was getting
this litter out of the helicopter
because they have a litter the soldiers
there with all their gear on they've got
a lift from a totally weird flexed
position right and this just turns out
it's not a really effective posture
position shape that transfers to handing
this higher loads so what do we do we
work on the range of motion we give them
skills to try to organize more
effectively shape and lo and behold we
can reduce injury risk and injury
incident in those soldiers right so what
we're always thinking about here is
let's get away from good and bad and
like posture doesn't matter and it also
doesn't matter at low load low speed and
I want to be very clear about that so
you can get away with
murder at low velocities and low speeds
but speed kills oh everyone's fine but
when that speed wobble starts to happen
we start to see greater likelihood of
deflection from posture your abs don't
work as effectively you can't create the
same inch abdominal pressure right check
check check check check so that's why we
always are saying hey is this true that
you're saying under high load high speed
when there's consequence because maybe
this set of conditions Works under these
conditions but it doesn't work across
all conditions and for me I'm trying to
take the best information I have working
in sports and performance and trying to
transmute that to my family transmute
that to my neighborhood and to the kids
I'm working with I'd like to take a
quick break and acknowledge one of our
sponsors element element is an
electrolyte drink that has everything
you need but nothing you don't that
means the electrolytes sodium magnesium
and potassium all in the correct ratios
but no sugar proper hydration is
critical for optimal brain and body
function even a slight degree of
dehydration can diminish cognitive and
physical performance it's also important
that you get adequate electrolytes the
electrolytes sodium magnesium and
potassium are vital for the functioning
of all the cells in your body especially
your neurons or your nerve cells
drinking element dissolved in water
makes it extremely easy to ensure that
you're getting adequate hydration and
adequate electrolytes to make sure that
I'm getting proper amounts of hydration
and electrolytes I dissolve one packet
of element in about 16 to 32 ounces of
water when I wake up in the morning and
I drink that basically first thing in
the morning I also drink element
dissolved in water during any kind of
physical exercise that I'm doing
especially on hot days when I'm sweating
a lot and therefore losing a lot of
water and electrolytes they have a bunch
of different great tasting flavors of
element they have watermelon Citrus Etc
frankly I love them all and now that
we're in the winter months in the
northern hemisphere element has their
chocolate medley flavors back in stock I
really like the chocolate flavors
especially the chocolate mint when it's
heated up so you put it in hot water and
that's a great way to replenish
electrolytes and hydrate especially when
it's cold and dry outside when hydration
is especially critical if you'd like to
try element you can go to drink
element.com huberman laab to claim a
free element sample pack with the
purchase of any element drink mix again
that's drink element.com huberman laab
to claim a free sample
pack as long as we're talking about
posture feels like a good transition
point to pelvic floor years ago and this
is a plug for the the material that you
put out online and in books but long
before we met um I decided to sign up
for your men's pelvic floor course out
sold our women's pelvic floor course two
to one it was so interesting because you
know
at that time um one could go online and
learn a little bit about pelvic floor
everyone and we talked about this um
with a couple different guests on this
podcast including the um director of M
male sexual health um he's an MD PhD or
at least an MD as I recall Mike
Eisenberg at Stanford we talked about
this with Mary CLA Haver and other
people in the female health I'm glad
we're normalizing this conversation yeah
we normalized this conversation you know
that the pelvic floor is Rich with vasc
for blood flow and neural input for
controlling muscles either passively or
actively and
I'll tell you the number
of people I know who have urinary issues
sexual dysfunction issues oh um I know
because they tell me that they squat
heavy in the gym they do their keyles
and things like that then I've had
guests on like Mike Eisenberg and others
and they say um yeah actually um if you
have a tight pelvic floor doing kulls is
about the worst thing you could ever do
for urinary function or um ere erection
function that's right you know because
you're sending it in the wrong direction
you need to learn to relax your pelvic
floor then um some women will say and it
seems to be women that report this
whether or not men just have this but
don't report it I don't know I've had
people write to me and say yeah you know
I'll do um some lower body work in the
gym and some urine is sneaking out and
it's like well pelvic floor and you had
this great course on pelvic floor that
taught me among other things um I and I
will say I wasn't suffering any of those
particular issues but I had prostate
pain
in my 30s and I was like what's going on
when and got my PSA measured perfectly
normal thought what's going on started
researching online read your work and
realized oh I think I might just have
tight pelvic floor started doing certain
things including you taught me how to
sit down and stand up correctly in this
video it's like you have to keep your
sternum high right you s I think said it
was like a stately stately uh let me
just there's no wrong way or right way
to stand up or sit down everyone but
there are ways that reflect increased
function especially when you're in a
dysfunctional state that right yeah
right I don't want to we're not trying
to um yet tell people what to do or not
to do but it was like wow you know I'm
probably hunched over too much I think
my hips are back too far when I'm
sitting um and maybe I'll move to a
standing desk or a sit stand desk which
is what I did lo and behold prostate
pain goes away yeah you know and had I
not found that course I might have gone
down the path of medication or something
else took care of everything I also I
will say the other thing I learned was I
I tend to have a slight um anterior
pelvic tilt so thinking about the pelvis
like a bowl as I understand like if that
bowl could be um you know the ridge of
that bowl could be parallel to the
ground or Tilted forward anterior pelvic
tilt or back you know posterior pelvic
tilt neutral seems like a good idea but
most people tend to have a you know some
natural propensity towards one or the
other started wearing I pretty much
always wore flat shoes Adidas or you
know skateboard shoes are pretty flat I
lucked out there the shoe game is strong
today the shoe game is strong today
adidos still wear them every day I love
them
um or or no shoes yeah you know which is
which is great and I noticed okay that
corrected some of um some of that
prostate pain too um by making oh excuse
me what what helped correct it was to
make sure that in the gym I did
something it turned out to be glute ham
raises that would put my P take my
pelvis through a a fairly full range of
motion from from you know posterior to
anterior tilt and I've come to love the
glute ham raay we're talking full range
glute ham raises as one of the most
useful tools just posturally for pelvic
floor so not it's stiffness in the
system resetting it high neurologic
component to actually do the
thing one of the things I hinted at
earlier is like I've chased biometer
output right int abdominal pressure and
being able to have a pelvic floor that
works for you is part of that system
like again we can take the physiology
and Goose it up and down what's
interesting about I had a a famous
friend who was filming a TV show and
we're working on his internal rotation
of his hip so if you're you imagine
someone on your back and I bring your
knee to your chest and I swing your foot
away from your midline right the femur
rolls in that's inter rotation of the
femur for everyone and I worked on his
intern rotation of his femur and just
improved his hip flexion knee to chest
just got those things going I get this
text that night he's like
bro what is up with my boners they're
out of control what is going on out of
in the in the positive direction and I
was like well there's this thing called
blood flow and when we improve blood
flow turns out re profusion is on the
list of things that we Chase so he'd
been uh crimping the hose so to speak
just stiff right and and I think when we
start to see that endopelvic fascia as a
system it's so easy for us to be
reductionists like I wouldn't even say
you had prostate pain I would say you
had pain in your prostate area right and
in fact that's what was told that
prostate region right and and P you're
like I don't know where my prostate is
okay that's General sense and I I also
saw that PSA level was well within
normal actually low range and I was like
what in the world is going on here and
you start you know you can find some
pretty scary stuff online about about
spinal cord injuries and this kind of
thing did what we just talked about um
and boom it's never been an issue again
we have um all the Olympic lifting gyms
even our gym we kept a towel on the
platforms so that women particularly
would pee themselves when they would
receive a heavy clean heavy snatch and
we would just wipe it up they'd actually
urinate on the platform oh yeah that
happens all the time all over the
Olympics everywhere you'll see that that
is blading continents is not normal
right totally normal to poop yourself
before a fight that's what animals do
totally not normal to pee yourself
peeing yourself is a sign of
disregulation for sure so what we're as
you're seeing is though hey I can't
manage this high intraabdominal pressure
creating and what ends up happening is
we pee ourselves so we can start by
saying well are there positions and
shapes theoretically I want your public
floor to work in all the shapes it's
Maxim there'll be some shapes where it
just doesn't work as effectively and if
you're a man so we're getting into it if
you go P you'll see a lot of men will
put their hand on the wall and they'll
adopt a anterior pelvic tilt to to pee
and what they'll do is basically just
turn the pelvic floor off and so if you
stand up and do a big anti your pelvic
tilt your pelvic floor will lose some of
its tone and it's easier to initiate a
string so anterior pelvic tilt again
folks is imagine your pelvis is a bowl
you're tilting It Forward like you're
going to pour water out of the bowl
which is a fair analogy here that's
right you're saying ideally they keep a
a neutral pelvis and use the force of
their of their muscles control their no
no I'm saying that if you it's much more
difficult to pee in this position where
we have high in like high control over
these systems and what you'll see is
that most people will adopt a shape
where they basically inhibit their
public Flor so they can pee standing up
I can't believe we're going to dissect
urine posture urinating urinating
posture but I think it's I think it's
really important let's contrast that to
the famous sculpture of the the boy ping
and he's and I like leaning backed
leaning back same same posture he's his
pelvis is forward and he's leaning back
that's the same posture
so son will know this right um so um you
know when you're a young kid young boy
um
you can like it almost feels like you
can pee over a car if you had to maybe I
tried
that I'm just saying it was a Volkswagen
one right so but here's so is there a
proper posture for peeing no no no but
initiating a stream maintaining a stream
is like that's a sign of sexual health
of Functional Health this you're General
Health and what's nice now is notice how
we got to this very nuanced conversation
about a Cal dysfunction about bladder
insufficiency about right peeing
ourselves we got there through
performance by we'll have athletes who
literally had a whole bunch of babies
suddenly have difficult time creating
High inch abdominal tone will jump rope
and as soon as and pee and as soon as
they come back to a more organized
position that allows them to transfer
energy more effectively recruit better
musculature have better organization
ping stops so what we said female athl
our women athletes you recommend they
jump rope well yeah absolutely
eventually I need to challenge that
floor that's an easy way to do it but
what we see is can you squeeze your butt
and jump at the same time and what
you'll find is that a lot of people as
soon as they adopt this interior pelvic
tilt glute goes off and they don't have
that glute control so that can be
problematic for a whole host of features
so
imagine I was hoping we're going to get
to hip extension eventually but you know
what we see is that stiffness in the
front of the quads and interior line of
fascia stiff front of capsule whatever
the mechanism is we do a lot of sitting
we're just we're
squatters my inability to take my knee
behind my hip we call this knees behind
butt knees behind butt guy that's what I
want to be known as knee but goes behind
your butt like you're to lunch that's
right sorry Ben um and then what we're
you're going to see is a lot of times
when we put people in those positions
they can't get a good glute squeeze okay
could one practice this I'm thinking
about it's been a while since I've taken
a yoga class and squeeze your butt you
would be like yeah I can practice this
okay so there's a pose in in yoga and
I'm not not an advanced Yogi but I've
taken a few yoga classes in my day where
you you're on your you're basically um
cropped up sitting on your knees soort
of like in the C and then yeah High
kneeling and then um hard to squeeze
your butt there isn't it it's hard to
squeeze your butt there and then because
of all the forces yanking you
interiorly those fascial lines the the
quads you're basically in that high
kneeling position and because the lower
leg is bent behind you you're being
dragged forward and it's difficult to
squeeze your butt and extend over
backwards so there's that do they call
it camel pose where you reach back and
grab your heels and you're supposed to
look up at the ceiling that's a gnarly
one it's a gnarly one if you do it in
the Bay Area the t-shir will say don't
be surprised if some emotions come up
no if you do this in Austin Texas they
just say it's supposed to hurt keep
going I'm just joking here this is like
Regional humor but in any event um I
think that's actually accurate by the
way um but in any event it's it is
slightly um unusual for most people who
aren't accustomed to it to do that
pose again doing that pose bring it up
for a reason and if you don't do that
pose you might do Kipping pull-ups
that's a global extension position all
we're doing is taking the spine and
putting a huge Global load in it instead
of a localized load so an anterior
pelvic tilt we might think of localized
extension in flexion where I have one or
two segments doing the line share we
whenever we can prefer to have Global
flexion extension because the spine
maintains its Integrity a little more
effectively so doing things like wheel
pose awesome putting your hands up near
your ears pushing your feet flat on the
ground pushing up into a you know an arc
Arc shape on the ground great
Diagnostics this should be is this
something that most people should be
able to do yes can most people probably
do it no can we then break down the
components of it yeah absolutely even
iyangar Yogi
Master started to bring in props block
and belts because he was seeing that his
his students weren't able to achieve
some of the base shapes and what they
were doing was human Jenga to get into
those patterns they were just solving
the problem and he was like hold up
let's not go around the problem let's
support you while we load you and
breathe in these these positions and
shapes given that most people don't have
a ton of time for movement um designated
blocks of time for movement um if one
were going to do let's say some uh
attempt toward wheel pose practice or
camel pose practice or um any number of
the other things that we're talking
about here which are taking the body
into positions that it that we're not
naturally putting it into given our
activities otherwise na um would you
suggest doing these at the end of a
resistance training workout when does it
work for you at some point you need to
be exposed in this position when are you
going to get exposed to this position if
it happens to be able to be clumped in
with your training fantastic if it's at
home in the evening fantastic if you if
you've done Sun salutation before it's
old school right it's almost like they
were like let's get this system going a
little bit so later on the day it's a
little bit easier so at some point we
need to expose you to some positions we
have something called The Hip spin up
and typically for my athletic
populations my teams especially I'm like
hey I want you to do one of three things
in the morning got 10 minutes that's all
I'm asking 8 to 10 minutes hip spin up
shoulder spin up or breath spin up just
just do one of those if if your back
hurts or knee hurts you get hip spin up
if your shoulder or neck hurts you get
shoulder spin up and then if not just
cycle through those so at least in the
morning we're starting to touch some of
these crucial shapes that you're never
in and if you do the hip spin up and
suffer I'm like well that's telling me
about your movement history your injury
history your movement diet and again
nothing that we do on the ready state is
related to super natural levels of range
of motion just basic range of motion the
range of motion again that everyone met
learns in med school everyone learns in
physical therapy school so what's fun
about what you said around this sort of
this pelvic floor Health piece is that
when we get people doing some
mobilization really brought to me really
brought my attention of Jill Miller is
that we start mobilizing the endopelvic
fascia we just land a ball just anywhere
from your pubic bone to your D your up
to Dio process but particularly belly
button South you'll see that none of
that should be uncomfortable and one of
the reasons we see high incidents of you
know pelvic floor dysfunction but also
High incidence of sports hernas is that
we have a hip that doesn't work very
well and ends up dragging that pelvis
into positions where it's not muscularly
very strong right I can get out of
position where I have a lot of good sort
of activation or or access to those
positions then I have fascia and
musculature that's super stiff because
every time you do abs you celebrate the
stiffness right you do abs you're like
oh I'm sore today I'm going to go have
some ice cream when's the last time you
manage your hamstrings or quads probably
yesterday when's the last time you
rolled out your abs and your obliques
never previous life right previous life
before you respond so I think one of the
things that we're seeing is again that
would be a perfect time to do in the
evening don't go to the gym and lay on
the kettle bell and be a creepy guy
instead pull out that volleyball at home
pull that princess ball you got at
Walgreens and start having a
conversation with your pelvic floor
turns out you know your your abdomen the
pelvic floor can also be mobilized so we
just it's really simple front of your
pelvis is your pubic bone that's the
front of the pelvic floor the back is
your coxic and each is yield to baras
your sit bones as the side everything
else is your pelvic floor so you can
take a ball and just stay away from the
holes and if anything hurts to
compression you found a problem so you
can contract and relax apply that same
tissue so I might be on my side I might
be rolling with the ball right
underneath me you you would just be
sitting down on your coffee table and
just putting that sitting that ball in
and around your pelvis and around your
glutes and around your pelvic floor
right you might be dangerously close to
your grundle you're welcome so the the
idea here though is you know often times
when we'll have athletes with back pain
we're not looking at their pelvic floor
or hip pain but you have six short hip
rotators right you don't just have a
couple rotators you have a huge Rotator
cuup of the hip and some of those things
are congruent and and kind of part of
that pelvic floor so it's that I need to
go after my P FL every day because again
not let me just add another thing to do
your list but if something changes I
suddenly wake up and I don't have an
erection I suddenly are discovering that
I'm peeing myself because I'm an elite
cyclist right and something's happening
that I'm like oh I don't know what to do
here let me start to work on my belly
let me see if I can work on restoring my
positions and can I do a little pelvic
phone immobilization and that's a great
place to start and which doctor was
involved none Which pelv floor therapist
was involved none in fact if you carry
that to your your your specialist
they're going to be like all right right
we get to have the real conversation now
because you've already done the other
stuff one thing that um frightens me and
maybe unnecessarily so is when I see um
men in particular doing crunch work like
ab work crunching with ankles
crossed um a because um people tend to
cross the same ankle over the other one
they don't they don't symmetrically
switch uh uh sides that's good
and my um my other understanding is that
this can also lead to some pelvic floor
issues and asymmetries simple solution
could be to not cross the ankles while
doing um like repeated contraction work
of of the abdominals it might being
silly I would put that lower on the list
of problems I have right like I think if
we went into the world right now and
looked at people doing curls you know
curl-ups the real thing is is that your
only way that you're the abdominals you
know am I do I have a bigger range of
motion of the trunk there are so many
ways to be thinking about what the trunk
should be doing and reducing it down to
this one curl I think if one of the
things that we're looking at like I'd
much rather you hang from a bar and curl
up yep so this is the this is pretty
much I W to say the only ab work I do I
do some anti-rotation work by staggering
my stance when I do curls or anything
else cuz it's a very time efficient way
to do it making sure my belly button
staying St so you're resisting the
temptation to rock from side to side and
get the anti- rotation work obviously
switching up The Stance but doing what
you described hanging from a bar doing
Pikes um to me you're also getting grip
work just for time efficiency also not
just separating the ABS and working with
the abdominals with the knee to the
chest because that's really what we're
seeing is that do you only need your abs
working in this position so basically
you're reproducing another seated
position except you're crunching your
chest to your seated knee and that's
really what that position is do we do it
long what happens if you do it long
lever short lever means elbow is bent
long lever is the elbow is straight
short lever is the knee is bent long
lever is the leg is straight so why
aren't we working in all those patterns
and positions and then being creative
there are so many G resources the the
kids at um Dave Durante has an free ab
workout he's an Olympic gymnist from
Stanford Superstar but you can go on to
I think it's I said Iron Monkey sorry
guys and uh you know what you'll see is
um there's so much fun ways to play and
think about what the role of the trunk
should do and I think we're moving
beyond thank goodness this like I have
to be a rigid robot all the time and
that we need to ask what is the trunk
supposed to do a good way of thinking
about this and I think you're sit up is
a good analogy um really a book that
makes the rounds from time to time is a
book called the spinal engine by Serge
grovy and he really talks about the
trunk as a driver of power not just as a
chassis of which the big engine moves
and that really is a nice conceptual way
of simplifying movement but if we Define
functional movement most people agree it
works in a wave of contraction from
trunk to periphery from core to sleeve
from axillary skeleton to peripheral
skeleton but that means boy there are
positions where I'm really effective and
can generate a lot of force and there'll
be position positions where I can but if
my spine can't handle flexion it's not a
spine if it can't extension it's not a
spine if it can't rotate and be into
these complex position shapes I'm like
red flag so how are you training that
thing and if your only rigid Dogma is
straight up and down which is a great
reason to do Mobility work is suddenly
we can side Bend and we can twist and am
I exposing myself to some of those
shapes and so we call that work
borrowing from one of my Olympic uh
friends Stu McMillan spinal engine work
putting PVC side bending playing with
the different shapes and again if you
threw get into the David W ropes if you
threw medicine balls you would suddenly
see you're like you're right I can't be
a rigid piece how am I training the
functionality of my trunk Beyond just my
six-pack because at you know straight
curling will certainly give you six-pack
but that doesn't necessarily mean you're
going to surf with power run with power
punch with power Etc I mean look at what
just happened with those fights right
with the women you know fighting just
the rotational power that they have you
can't get that from just cross crunches
with your legs so the fight right before
the um Tyson Jake Paul fight was
arguably the best fight and people had
seen it a long long time the spirit of
it and just the I mean they were just
incredible everyone watches women's
sports it was really great so I think
what's great now is if we can get people
to start to be curious and to play and
you know I'm not saying you need 10,000
different movements but instead of just
hanging from the bar and doing knees to
elbows or toes to Bar what happened if
you brought your right foot to your left
hand and you started adding in a
rotation to that and suddenly you're
like I suck at this and ultimately what
I want to do is I want to uncover every
deficiency in this play because I'm
still going to deadlift I'm still going
to swing I'm still going to launch I'm
do all the things that I know that makes
me feel robust and makes me ride my bike
better and be a better kayaker but
simultaneously there's a lot of play on
either side of that I love that you're
defining progression as is incorporating
these um novel movements exploring dude
that's Westside
101 Lou Simmons I mean like hey this
week we're squatting with this bar then
we're squatting with this bar and then
we're changing your height then we're
changing your stance I mean Westside
barbell has been doing this for ever I
didn't realize they did that I knew they
were like crazy gnarly like every bar
has its own Max right and so what
they've done has said hey the squat
pattern is the thing we're training but
how do we put another twist to the
pretzel now the weights in front now the
weight's behind now it's out and now
it's too deep and now we're box
squatting now and like wow you're going
to have to be a really confident skilled
squatter to handle all that seems like
in so many sports not just for
resistance training but in so many
sports um there's this move uh shift now
toward being an ATV an all Trin vehicle
like you can't afford to just be good at
one thing you know um and the cool thing
about it is that you know the more
dynamic range that people are expressing
the more kind of evolution you see of
any kind of sport and I think we're
going to see see this with Fitness too
I'm realizing this as we have this
conversation that what you're really
suggesting is that people explore their
movement patterns I love this thing that
I've heard you say for years and I know
McKenzie harps on this too which is
Brian Mackenzie that is um you should be
able to breathe well in every position
it's such a fun test actually it's such
an easy test you know squat down like
you're going to get something out of the
cupboard see if you can take like a full
belly breath see if you can get that
your belly going out on the inhale there
I like to do this test myself every once
while hang from the bar I'll you know
those Pikes I don't get very many of
them admittedly I'm doing like five sets
of five occasionally we'll try and twist
a little bit and as my grip strength
improves slightly maybe I'll be able to
get more usually my grip strength
smaller legs it would be
easier um I'll take that as either a
compliment or an insult coming from you
Kelly um Kelly's exceedingly strong he
deadlifts 600 lbs on the regular he's
he's exceedingly strong and he's he has
incredible endurance you're actually
more of an endurance guy I think this is
worth mentioning that you have why I'm
not very strong you have you have more
of um right but um have you seen my
strong friends I'm not I'm not
deflecting your physiology is definitely
biased towards certain things like
unequivocally and what I am not good at
is being brutally strong oh I've been
training for 20 plus years hard training
longer than that 30 years and this is
all I can deadlift that's pathetic have
you seen my strong friends so what you
see is that I've been cramming a square
peg into a round hole because I really
like it but really I should be probably
190 lb and I should be an aerobic
athlete right like if we threw a 100 lb
backpack on you and went backpacking
you'd be fine you you'd be like a even
now in the you you're sitting at
somewhere like 240 right you're like 62
you you can go you can go for days like
you're naturally an endurance athlete
and I think it's worth saying because
people are listening Kell a big guy all
my training is biased towards you cannot
believe how much conditioning I do I am
a disciple of Joel Jameson I'm a huge
fan of to look at where I'm spending my
time in these different heart rate zones
and then you know I'm just such a nerd
of that because my primary sport is
trying to keep up with my wife on the
mountain bike I I think this is really
important because I think we've been
talking a lot about things kind of
adjacent to resistance training I think
it's a wonderful shift now in in culture
that resistance training is being uh
used done by by by Young People by older
people women and men you know it's
fantastic this was not the case 10 years
ago this was definitely not the case 20
years ago was like bodybuilders football
preseason football players and Military
were the only people weight training now
it's everywhere um but you're naturally
an endurance athlete um I'm guessing
that most people I'm assuming is this
true fall into the slower twitch kind of
more endurance propensity then um I mean
how many truly naturally strong fast
fiber type people are walking walking
around out there if we just took the
general that are are sprinters and super
springy and you you know who those
people are they're mutants you know um I
think I was always best at a skilled
sport that use conditioning or use
strength when I compare myself to my
friends who have huge arobic engines
it's embarrassing I'm always the weakest
fattest slowest smallest person in the
room and it is I can't like if you just
want to Ego check just come out hang out
with me just meet my friends see the
people we're working with and you'll see
you're like okay genetics is not the
same I think we've told a little bit of
a lie in the internet sphere that like
if you eat this way and you do these
you'll be elite and like we can
certainly say that you have a training
effect for sure and you should do that
but that's not the same thing as being a
mutant and there are just so mean
mutants out there shocking yeah I think
I think um it's actually a worthwhile
exercise to figure out what one's
natural leanings are what do you like to
do how about that I just think it's
important
that we remind ourselves that the whole
point of this is to have the most fun
and what you'll see he put up a video of
some Chinese elementary school kids and
the Chinese Olympic lifting team coaches
coming and assessing their kids and very
quickly they put kids over at squats
they had them jump on a single leg they
had them do double jumps and they were
like you you you have your parents call
me right so you can already see that
coordination matters wiring matters exp
and they were able to say hey these are
the things that we think are going to
make good Olympic lifters so those kids
I think we start to split cohort early
on but most important is everyone needs
to weightlift period and it's not light
to Pink dumbbells it's real heavy
weightlifting but how much do you need
to do to be better at your sport or to
minimize your spine those are the spine
changes or or osteopenia or osis those
are great conversations but not
necessarily conversations about
performance right so it's almost like we
need to divide this into like Aesthetics
and I'm keeping myself intact in versus
I want to go to the Olympics because
what you're seeing on the world right
now is that it everyone's an expert I'm
like can I see how you work with 40
athletes can I see how you periodize
that can I see how you manage travel and
nutrition can I see how you know you
were responsible or not responsible for
this team having all its members so what
we're seeing is that it's a this
performance thing is a really big task
and it gets confused and water down a
little bit by everyone fitnesses well I
I squat so I'm an expert too not the
same our good friend Kenny Kane taught
me something he's sh ke shaking his head
the best the best he's a wonderful guy
you're not going to find him on social
media because a few years ago he just
decided to take his gym and and himself
off social media he's a very very
talented so we're going to give you his
phone number we're going to have you
call him because he can't DM him very
talented uh athlete and wonderful person
he taught me something uh say about
eight years ago that I've found oh so
useful for uh my training longevity my
enjoyment of training and it was this
very simple 80% of your workouts Andrew
he said are going to be at 80% of what
you could do that
day okay that involves some humility I
like to sweat hard I associate intensity
with hard work etc he said 10% are going
to be at 90% intensity meaning 100% is
the most you could give possibly in
whatever time is allotted on that day
given the Sleep given the nutrition
given the life circumstances on that day
the Readiness for that day right and
then here's where it breaks down a
little bit more 5% are going to be at
95% and 5% across the year are going to
be maximum 100% everything you can give
Do or Die workouts that day and for me
last year I believe it was was that was
the The Rock carry C cam hand's podcast
I gave everything I had had of course
had the mountain been a little bit
higher I'd like to think I would have
gone a little bit further but I gave
everything I could because that rock was
slippery and it was muddy and my
hamstring was out the day when we
started that you know I was in pain when
we started
anyway I think that advice that Kenny
gave me was some of the best advice I've
ever heard because my tendency would
have been and had been to come in and go
at 90 95 or 100% every single
workout CA PRK
Long Way Y and it also brought me to
this place where after8 or 10 weeks of
training I would get a cold or I'd get
some nagging thing a little thing not
you know wouldn't put me under but then
or I need to take a week off normal
accident Theory right so I think um I'd
love your thoughts on on Kenny's
recommendation for me it's one of the
things that I pass along anytime says
how about some Fitness advice I say well
listen I'm a neuroscientist not a
fitness guy but I know a thing or two
based on the mistakes I've made here's a
great piece of advice that's really
helped me 80% of your workouts 80%
intensity another 10% at 90% then the 95
you know 5% at 95 and 5% across the year
are the all out everything you can give
leave it all on the mat type workouts we
could start with a simple idea we we say
let's be consistent before we're heroic
right I if your
intensity causes you to not be able to
show up for the gym for three days I'm
like sweet that was sweet and our ration
response to that is sucky right I much
rather you be getting more consistent
and not blowing yourself out remember
that there was a phase where we like you
shouldn't be sore when you leave the gym
remember that like there people would
talk about hey leave some reps in the
reserve like show up the next day Grease
the groove that's old P Seline stuff I
think that's really good advice
especially since most people are not 20
most people and when you're 20 you need
to go find out what the limits are touch
the fence the electric fence once in a
while right lick
the lick all the doorknobs let's just
call it that way but uh you you know
what ends up happening is there's a lot
of things have to be in place for you to
be able to go to the well that many
times and what we know now because we
have all of this data is that we can
make better progress not burning It To
The Ground every single time and it's
difficult for us because if I'm Just
Fitness how do I quantify that right
it's easy for us to quantify another
kilo or another Watt that's makes it a
lot easier and what you'll see is the
best practices of these athletes we do
spend a lot of 70 to 80% heart rate
that's what we call recovery in Joel
Jameson language 80 to 90 we're calling
that conditioning 90 and above overload
but what I think is nice is that that
gives me a lot of there are some days
where I touch 78 or 80% and it's hard
because I'm sleep deprived stressed out
my nutrition hasn't been great I'm
sleeping in a strange bed right you know
traveling whatever so I think what
you're seeing is um is something that
one of my
uh early coaches talked about Mike
bergner he says when the frying Pan's
hot let's cook and that means I need to
know myself and as a coach I need to
know you and I'm like Andrew you look
great today how do you feel great let's
go let's go chase something right and
when the frying Pan's hot we cook but
the frying pan is not always hot and if
you pour in bang energy and Jack 3D and
you can't even hear inputs and outputs
so I I think you I think that's such
solid reasonable advice and really what
we're looking at is how can we get you
to train much more consistently longer
and longer and longer you can only go to
the well a few times and what I'll tell
you is that is I still love to power
clean it's like my favorite thing and
that 100 kilo power clean is heavier
than it was when I was 40 you know and I
want to pretend like that 100 kilo power
clean is not a problem but I actually
have to progress and get myself there
and there are days where I'm like n 80
80 kilos is my jam today so I think
that's really good advice and difficult
for us to say how are we measuring
success in our training subjective
experience well no problem let me give
you a baby keep this newborn alive and
then let's go see how hard your training
is the next day you're going to be
terrible you haven't slept all night
you're stressed right so I think what's
nice is having some sub objective
measurements around maybe body
composition is one of them if that's
important to you but are you getting
faster over the course of a week what
are your testing how do we know inputs
and outputs and now we're just doing
we're baking a lot we're making a lot of
uh suicides right you the old fountain
drink where you just makes all the
things it's you know they always taste
the same at the end like crap but that
suicide where you mix all the fountain
drinks is a little bit of what we're
seeing in that and one way of protecting
ourselves is saying hey let's make sure
you can train tomorrow suicides I was
reflecting on that the other day for
some reason why at a wedding or a party
young typically it's a y chromosome
Associated disorder to feel like you
have to mix a bunch of bunch of stuff in
then get someone to drink it um
non-alcoholic drinks for young kids by
the way mixing all the sodas putting M&M
just something like all my my my male
friends and I think that's what we see a
little bit and if you you if you I am a
deep coach nerd I love Fitness I love
Fitness thing I'll jump into any class
anytime like sure let's go let's see you
know I it's so fun but I need to see I I
do get to watch sort of Trends come and
go things get very hot you know they get
very popular they and again the fitness
has become a hobby it's an amuse and
that's okay it's totally okay that JY is
a hobby but that doesn't hint about
what's the best way to develop capacity
Elite capacity long-term longevity
capacity it those things almost don't go
together let's talk about hip extension
oh bless you um as somebody who um
doesn't like the elliptical or
stationary bike but loves the assault
bike I love the assault bike I don't
know why um just feels like really good
work it is hard work uh but you're not
going to find me on Bill made it harder
with the Echo Bike thanks for making it
worse what the Echo Bike the Rogue Echo
Bike is even worse than the assault bike
uh the assault Bike by the way folks is
the one with the fan and um I'm not sure
if they put the fan is for resistance
not to not to keep you cool but it has
that effect somewhat in the winter
you'll know what the fan does U so um
the Echo Bike is a harder assault bike
it's just like imagine do doing it on
fire uphill in the sand with a headwind
then you're like okay this is if you can
make it worse it's worse if you have one
of these I'm going to swing by this
winter break and uh and try this thing
but I love that because High physiology
low skill that's great you just
described me in a nutshell I can take
anyone not know have to know anything
about your range of motion and I can be
like who are you physiologically today
let me introduce this freakish amount of
work in this tiny range of motion that's
very safe so we can really touch High
intensities very safely there mhm yeah I
like it much more than the skier I'll do
the skier every once in a while but I I
find that the skier if I just sit sit
and stand a bunch of times I be like I
can just do this for for 15 days you
know like is this exercise and I'm like
am I doing this right I don't know for
some reason doesn't feel like work the
assault bike always feels like work
always feels like work okay so hip
extension the assault bike is not hip
extension typically you're you know tend
to be people tend to be hunch forward
you could get upright right you can
still don't have any hip extension so no
hip extension let's talk about if I'm
squatting and I stand up I'm extending
the hip as you stand up right I'm going
from flexion to extension yeah one thing
that I think for people listening that
um at least is helpful for me when when
hearing about squatting is to think
about um whether or not it's a deadlift
or a squat you can imagine taking your
hands putting your fingers at your hips
and you you know hiding your hands in
your in your um in that joint between
the femur and your pelvis as you go down
right your hands get get tucked into the
the fold between between the two and as
you stand up it opens so it's hip hinge
they typically call it right and I think
what you we look at the squat and the
lunge is very their cousins and the
difference is long lever short lever and
typically how you're holding the weight
that's the only difference and sometimes
UPR torso position but ultimately we're
really looking at you know what's
happening with the degree of Bend of the
of the knee right that's why they're
such elegant cousins but if I'm
squatting down and I stand up people are
like I'm working on extension work on
extension all the time I'm like okay now
let's continue this extension
conversation and bring that knee behind
your butt into a lunge and that's hip
extension and if there's one thing that
I'm seeing across so many of the
populations I work with is we're
starting to see changes and erosion in
this fundamental expression of power the
only people we don't see it is our
Olympic sprinters they're and and you'll
see that Pockets like we work with the
All Blacks and we're obsessed on
maintaining the hip EXT mention these
very strong athletes because it means
that they can run faster on the field
rugby team those um am I correct in
thinking that hip extension we can think
of as a um you partially reflecting
hamstring function where the hamstring
is responsible for bringing the heel up
toward the butt but also for bringing
the femur back behind the Torso I I
realize I'm not using the PT Language by
the way the PT is online your community
of the pts you guys just crack me up in
the field of of uh medicine there's
there's an analogous sub specialty of
medicine where they have the similar
kind of like orneriness and it's being a
PT is very competitive and so there's a
you don't do this but the PT Community
it's like it's some you can make a cart
you can make a whole sitcom about this
the the attacks often range from
significant to like cluster around Petty
not because they're not knowledgeable
but because there's so much Nuance in
this field right and it seems that there
are few things that everyone agrees on
and then everything else people love to
argue in community out of community so
anytime I say anything about movement of
the body I wanted to just say I realize
I'm probably not using the correct I'm
going to use that same defense of petty
cluster clustering the pettiness I'm
sorry all the physical therapists out
there I haven't represented you in the
way that you would like to be
represented I'll say I'm just talking
about my own experience differences in
nomenclature right and I am trying to be
very meticulous in my language today
yeah um one of the things that we want
to look at is um and this is a Philip
Beach muscles Meridian idea is that
there are contractual fields and this
goes along with if we look at Thomas
Meyer's Anatomy trains of seeing the
system as a system of system so we start
to look at your back and your Erectors
and then we tie that into the glutes and
then we tie that into the hamstrings and
tie the calf it's kind of a almost wraps
around the door the bottom of the foot
right the planet surface of the foot so
suddenly we're we're looking looking at
this global system that's designed to
create this Mass
extension
position Locomotion we start to lock
some of those pieces down a little bit
but one of the things that we've seen is
that when you aren't competent in this
position your hamstrings for example
have to do a lot more work because your
butt is no longer working on hip
extension your adductors are restricted
and they're not bringing you back into
flexion so suddenly what we see is that
your hamstrings are having to do the
work of calf but one your hamstrings are
tied all the time you don't have hip
extension so a simple test we do is
called the couch
stretch and all you need to do is face a
wall then turn away from the wall so
you're kneeling on the ground hands and
knees away from the wall you're going to
put one of your knees in the corner so
your foot is going straight up and down
the knee is in the corner of the wall
and then I want you to see if you can
squeeze your butt in that position still
hot hands and KNE except one foot now is
kind of in the corner down the wall
going toward butt that's position one a
lot of people are going to struggle with
recruiting and activating their butt in
that position because it's what I'm
calling positionally inhibited we don't
know what the mechanism is so you're
getting the knee back behind the Torso
much as one would if they if you were
sprinting and the rear leg is is really
we're just flexing the lower leg we're
flexing the lower leg shank right that
lower limb second position is to come up
into a high kneeling position position
so you just bring your knee up and like
you're kneeling except that we have a
trailing leg now with a leg that's going
up the wall so front leg is sort of a
right angle right you have foot on the
ground right angle that's right rear leg
is a knee tucked in the corner at the
where the floor meets the the couch um
foot is up on the couch nope just on the
ground okay and we'll provide a link to
it I called the couch dress cuz I
created this thing a long time ago and I
created it on the couch for my young
athlet while they were watching TV right
I just needed some hip extension
exposure but we can do it on the wall do
on the couch ultimately what we try to
say is do you have glute squeeze can you
take a breath right if your breath
starts to get real small in this
position I'm like huh so every time your
knee comes behind your body you can't
breathe anymore H how's that working for
you when you run is that good or bad
seems to me that your breath should
remain pretty constant independent of
what your hip does so then we like to
see if people can come to a more upright
position so that's kind of position
three so a little bit more upright torso
we're starting to increase hip demands
as the Torso comes upright torso is
coming upright the knee is moving
further away from the chest on that
loaded leg and what you'll see is that
most people are going to be like wow
that's real stiff or I can't even get
there or I can't breathe there or I have
to Banana back to get there and I
certainly can't squeeze my butt there
and I want to tell everyone this is a
low-level test the real test is your
front foot goes up on a 12in to 18inch
box so we're not even in the test yet
we're with front leg front no front leg
just up higher so we Elevate the front
leg into what's called a hip lock so
that front leg is suddenly taking my
pelvis and rotating it posteriorly knee
is bringing the running into pelvis
pelvis is like tucking and now you're
really going to see what's going on with
your hip extension so this is the
equivalent position more or less of
front knee um sprinting like really like
like jut it up in the air you know maybe
even past the belly button definitely
past the belly butt
rear rear leg behind you so this is sort
of like you know coton mid stride okay
that's right and so suddenly we have
this nice test that allows us to see in
our competency there and I want to
remind you if you do the couch stretch
and filament your knee is actually in
hip extension it's not your knee isn't
even behind your butt here it's that
hard and I'm still biasing it towards
flexion so what we're seeing is that you
have a real deficit of hip extension so
that's one way to improve it you could
just do the test camp out there take
some breaths contract relax breathe do
your resistant isometrics whatever you
want to do there so many ways to J that
up rotate side
bend the question is how are you now
loading that thing in your life so we
can put a band on you and get you do
some isometric standing but show me in
your movement language in the gym how
you're reinforcing hip extension so when
we were talking about deadlifting with a
tandem stance still not hip extension
right I'm extending the hip but that
trail leg is not rear foot elevated
split squat ding ding ding ding we start
to get there right bulgarians flipping a
tire like any time where I need to be
able to a big lunge is a good example
forward lunge back lunge tell me about
flipping a tire so are you talking about
flipping a tire but then at the top of
the movement you're doing like a kettle
bell swing Where You Buck your hips
forward like you're going to try and pee
over that Volkswagen pushing over don't
try and pee at the top but but you're
talking about bucking the hips forward
that's right suddenly you're upright and
that leg that trailing leg is in
extension in a long lever position so we
spend a lot of programming one of the
best persons at this is France Bosch um
I mentioned earlier and he has something
I've termed like the Bosch snatch so if
you imagine being in a double stance so
I'm just like I'm swinging a kettlebell
if I took a plate or a dumbbell doesn't
matter I'm just going to basically go
from a hip hinge and as I go overhead
with the weight of the load whatever is
appropriate for you I'm going to take my
front foot and step it up on a box so
all of a sudden I'm going from a flexed
position in the hip c-shaped body right
or or upright torso but hinged c-shaped
right weird C and then havela C and then
I'm going to step forward and now I'm
going to have that one of those legs is
going to be an extension and so suddenly
now we're adding speed to this extension
because that's not what we do with
reverse rear foot elevated split squats
we're not loading that in speed so we
start at the speed component to what
we're doing and suddenly we've
discovered another way to challenge our
movement it doesn't just always be half
heavier it can also be faster so I'm
basically if imagine if I was here's a
great example I love pressing I think
overhead pressing is the bees knees it's
one of my non-negotiables we're going to
press seesaw press overhead press we're
pressing but if I take your front foot
and put it up on a box make sure that
back foot is straight with all your toes
on the ground and press from that
position you're going to find out why
you don't have any hip extension it's
going to be so you won't even think
about the weight you'll think about your
growing exploding so a lot of you
recommend people probe that that mean
those mechanics AB with very light
dumbbells at first no go press go find
out how way you can press overhead and
you're going to see that like wow this
tandm stance front foot elevated you
know press is going to kill you can um
there there's a movement I do I'm
guessing well I'm curious if it
activates hip extension the way I think
it does here's here's what I've been
doing that I found useful I don't know
if it's true or not but what I'll is
I'll tie a fairly thick band to a
pull-up bar I I'll squat down I'll hold
it like I'm holding a like a pole in
front of me like a pole carrier in a in
a um in a parade or something I'll squat
down and I'll jump up and but instead of
of um but I'll Buck my hips forward at
the top so like feet go out in front
it's very unnatural U movement actually
as opposed to jumping and putting my
toes down pointing my toes down my toes
are are kicking forward so I'm trying to
mimic the top of a kettle bell swing at
thep top of this movement I I would say
you know one of the things that is
useful for me as I am asked to come and
tear through people's programming look
for holes in their movement practices we
look at fundamental shapes so what's
nice is that okay hang on everyone let
me let me Define exercise for you let me
just I'll just give you a little
framework and I'll start by saying
something inflammatory the shoulder is
not that complicated it doesn't do that
many things goes overhead MH goes out to
the side goes in the front it goes in
the back that's what your shoulder does
you can bend the elbow you can twist and
all those shapes but those are the four
fundamental primary organizations of the
shape of the of the shoulder hip has
flection extension right really I could
I can go laterally but that's just a
different kind of squat but really like
am I squatting with the foot really
narrow or my squat a little bit wider so
what we can then do is say in these
fundamental bookends these benchmarks
this what we call archetype suddenly I
can ask well how are you loading your
overhead position so if you're always
pressing on a bar or pulling on a lat
down machine you actually are overhead
but you're not in the fullest expression
over overhead right which is your arms
straight up and down parallel by your
ears hands over the top of your head STS
over your head right so what we can then
do is say well what what tools do you
like to use Kettle Bell's great that's
one of the reasons k was so great single
arm I can't hold it out here it's going
to fall I have to finish over my head
right dumbbells the same but the kettle
bell is ass salt it constrains us to
express full overhead motion I can look
at do you have enough inter rotation
with the Hand by the side are you doing
enough pressing like activities
chaturanga the finished position of my
row right bench press dip running those
are all movements where my shoulder
comes into extension whether the arm is
straight or bent so what's nice now is I
can say well am I distracting those
tissues or compressing those tissues
well you're like well what do you mean
I'm like are you pressing or are you
doing a pull-up right pressing overhead
or doing a pull-up that's compressing or
distraction right very simple ways of
looking at these movements we can say
well how are you coming there did you
get there from a snatch or did you get
there from a front rack position so we
can look at start position finish
position and suddenly what you're
realizing is you're like oh I'm starting
to understand the root movements and
root positions that help me improve
performance predict future performance
and help me get through pain because if
I have people not expressing the highest
levels expression of the movement that's
something we can improve that's
technique right it's not just get bigger
and stronger it's hey let's be more
technically proficient so I have all of
these ways of looking at the movement
selection choices again what are you
comfortable with but then I can
challenge it with load make it heavier
we can do volume we could add speed we
could add cardiorespiratory demand you
could do more than five and suddenly you
have to do 20 and we have metabol demand
in there you and I are competing all of
a sudden right now suddenly I go from
open Torque to closed torque I go from
giving you a barbell to a dumbbell right
I go from open chain to closed chain
suddenly we're like holy moly block
practice random practice I have all the
tools for me to understand are you
competent putting your arms over your
head or are you exposing these shapes
under these different domains and I
think when we only look at sort of a few
ranges of motion and we only look at
load as the way then we lose all the
opportunity and richness of programming
got it well let me come back to um my
silly example of the band and the jump
thing and say okay so for getting better
hip extension which is what I think a
lot of people need is what I'm hearing a
lot of people are in hip flexion so
you're jumping and then coming up yeah I
mean or you know we've seen these
beautiful images of certainly not me but
like um people doing long jump where
they're kind of like in a in a ared
position something yeah so the idea is
with the band it's safe right you know
um trying to get the hip into extension
or feed out in front of the jumping it's
it's a Kipping pullup without a pull-up
you're just Kipping on the bar and I
don't Kip on my pull-ups by the way um
because I'm a time under no I don't Kip
on my pull-ups
um I don't I train with Ben Bruno from
time to time you keep on a pull-up with
Ben Bruno there you're never going to
hear the end of it ever so I don't but I
don't anyway cuz I I'm a I'm aention
that's fine I'm going to say that I love
stric pull-ups I do more pull and you
can imagine but if you can't Kip there's
something wrong with you okay got it uh
we'll argue about this more offline um
but I love to Sprint so um that's hip
extension absolutely uh love to Sprint
love to Sprint um and I love jumping
like I I'm a big believer in this maybe
true maybe not true uh idea that as we
get older we tend to jump and land less
a lot of injuries come from you know
lack of Ecentric Lo saying in out of the
Soviet system when you stop jumping you
start dying mhm you you and the lowest
form could be trampolining the highest
low another low form jump roping highest
form starting to be really powerful I
love it I I you're killing it and what's
great now is you just made this switch
you start describing your training in
blocks of
positions what position am I training
what shape am I reinforcing right that's
a really not it's not a muscle remember
your muscles are not wired for movement
your brain is wired for movement right
you can't you don't have any selective
control over a single muscle in your
body that's a mistake so you're not
really working your biceps you're
working arm flexion right in a variety
of positions this squat exercise biases
my quads more but I'm not actually
quading right because that's impossible
yeah I think that the um the
misconception the broad
misconception is that resistance
training is just to build and strength
and muscles in a bodybuilding kind of
fashion and no disrespect to the body
body builders but we learned a lot but
you know we learned a ton and and and
yet most people would probably do well
to think about functional movements in
fact there are a few Instagram accounts
that that really like to come after um
not just me but a lot of people that um
have talked about resistance training at
all that talk about functional patterns
and I have to say as much as the the
messaging sometimes I think is a little
bit abrasive I pay attention to these
and I have seen some of the before and
afters that they'll show for people that
will incorporate into their training
like a like throwing or or um you know
ballistic movements from you know fully
stop sprinting out the gate kind of
thing and focusing um immensely on
balancing the two sides of the body and
without ever having done those programs
I have to say like yeah like a lot of
these people had some pretty
dysfunctional patterns and they look
like they're doing better and I think
it's because I must I have to assume
that they're incorporating a much
broader uh range of of movements um more
hip extension working the two sides of
the body all the things that you're
talking about all the things that you're
talking about and so I think that the
bodybuilding piece I think is a great
thing for getting people out the gate I
always say the amazing thing about
resistance training forgive me for going
long here but I think this is something
that um if somebody is not naturally
inclined to exercise or resistance
training resistance training is one of
the few forms of exercise that because
of the blood flow the so-called pump
give people a visual and um sens a
sensation based window into the progress
they might make hell yeah right I mean
this is like like going for a run and
getting to like at the end of your run
you see a little less body fat and then
two days later you you you've reduce
your body fat percentage right like it
gives you a window into your future when
you resistance train that way and and a
Gateway into a conversation that's very
complex this is all I think about and
people are like hey I just want to feel
better I don't want to get hurt in my
calves when I run you're like okay it
can be really simple and also you have
your right to look jacked and tan I mean
you you can be jacked all you want Mark
makes this point every single post look
I think um there's something that I try
we don't ever punch down we just don't
you know just point we point to what we
do this just our model but any model
that someone's on the internet a model
has to do three things it has to explain
current phenomenon right it has to
predict future phenomenon and it has to
be easily communicated so let me see
your model how it works how does it
explain if I do your thing well I get
better at this thing right that's the
thing I'm interested in right so when I
is oh a lot of recursive fun fitness
where people feel better but I still
have to go over here and squat or I
still have to go over here and and and
become conditioned but you can see the
truth of needing to expose people to
bigger ranges of motion and more skilled
movement than some of the things we're
getting traditionally in the gym right
and and I think one of the things that
we saw with like a a pivot towards
movement culture right kind of coined by
you know portal is that what we were
seeing is that the gym didn't beget
necessarily better movers what we had
was people originally doing a skill
throwing something running track and
field we would train and then go do more
of that and then what we did is we took
the gym or took the sport skill movement
out of it and we just remained in the
gym and you can see the reaction to that
as well you're not very elegant you
can't don't have any mo Moving Solutions
you don't for your energy very well
you're not you know you're not graceful
you can't you have no rhythm so the real
key for us is like I think we want to
put playback in there and you can see
what the reaction is to hey if we're
just doing bench press and hack squats
maybe that's not making the best mover
but it's certainly making a jacked guy
who's what we call what is it in that
movie hot girl fit where uh you know
it's one of the recent movies where the
GU uh who's the guy from uh Twisters
that incredible actor he was in Top Gun
anyway he's swimming and the girl is
like hey why are you out of breath he's
like I don't do cardio I just do abs and
biceps she's like oh my God your hot
girl fit like you have this big engine
that looks good with noo and I want to
make sure that no offense to all the hot
girls out there but the idea here is
what is it you want to do with your
body let's start there and then we can
start to say well what do you have
access to what's your training age and
it's a Nuance conversation it's probably
why you should have a coach and develop
a coach for the for the rest of your
life but let's not pretend that having
abs and big biceps is going to make you
a good MMA fighter right and you can see
why the resistance of hey that made me
less athletic we want to be careful of
that yeah I like using the resistance
training to make me stronger and better
at running yes and that's my that's
actually that's what's in my mind I only
ran cross country one season in high
school wasn't very good but it really
enjoyed it but I I love running I've
been running for a long time and and I'm
I'll never be a I ran cross country one
year in high school maybe we ran against
each other oh no you're a year older
than I am so I I I would yeah well I'll
tell the story some other time it's not
my my stories aren't are relevant here
but but I use resistance training to be
able to run better faster further
without pain for me that is that is what
I would hope we look at training for now
apply a longevity lens a durability lens
right or as Juliet says she's like don't
you want to just be able to pop off the
couch and go on adventures right I want
to have a body that's capable of that I
think what we've been pitching in the
gym doesn't really do that and even that
I just want everyone to hear and double
click on what Andrew said that framework
is that I now have a third party
objective measure does my running get
better with my training it's a really
great great way to evalue your training
am I faster do I feel better it's really
worked for me and it keeps me out of um
any uh kind of gravitational pull toward
just trying to get more weight on the
hack squat machine which I enjoy
Progressive overload I enjoy doing
movements better with more weight Etc
but um I find that the gym just becomes
this
um when it's a closed loop I find
becomes this kind of like endless
exploration like what am I really also
at this age like I want to maintain
strength and build some muscle perhaps
but mostly you want to get heavier I
don't isn't that weird I don't no my
goal right now you need as much muscle
as you can because winter is coming my
goal is to actually get much stronger
without getting bigger and and to keep
my endurance going I like to do one long
Rucker run per week at one shorter run
uh one one Sprint type run I just figure
like I'll be everyone what you just
described for a typical person is doing
a long piece a short piece and a high
intensity piece that's red that is
really that's the crack yeah that's
right every week if I'm you know most
weeks and then I'll lift you know legs
one day you know torso everyone laughs
torso what kind of thing is that you
know torso including neck and abs that's
next let's go flank too you want to get
torso on flank really confused work my
flank and uh and then I'll do the what
could be called distal muscles I'll do
an extra workout for for calvs biceps
and triceps and forearms and grip
strength on Saturday and and that
combination of things right this isn't
about my training to me meets the
demands of life like I can Sprint for
the airplane with my luggage and get
there and not cough up both lungs I can
go backpacking like if you say hey let's
go backpacking or grand Canon tomorrow
you're gonna carry 75b sack I'll be a
little bit sore at night but it'll feel
good I'll feel good sore right um we can
um go to the gym together and I can put
you know what feels to me like a
respectable amount of weight on the hack
squat we do some fullrange glute ham
raises I can hang from a bar but I'm not
trying to beat a pull-up record or run a
try run a marathon I find that anytime
I've gone to the extreme and any one
kind of training I end up injured sick
and I'm just not interested in that and
I like to think I could be wrong I'm
projecting here probably that I'm
representative of what most people want
I also want to be able to overeat a
little bit every now and again like
thanksgiving's coming a little bit I
also want to be able to not have to eat
all day and then eat a big dinner and
not dissolve into a puddle of my own
tears because I'm neurotically worried
about something nutrition-based like I
tend to I basically skip one meal a day
just by virtue of my schedule right it's
like non-intentional intermittent
fasting and the people who are obsessive
about protein will say well gosh that
isn't as good but yeah okay so maybe I
get a little bit less muscle I'm not
doing I don't want to be so neurotic
about my training that I'm not focusing
on the bigger missions of my life and
notice that what you said was I train so
I can have fun and I just want to double
click on we have sucked the joy and the
play and exposure out of training and
out of fitness and now it's I have to
have this V2 Max so I'll live to 50 and
I have to do right and you forgot that
we this whole thing is so you can go
spend some credits so I like to say the
the gym and all that really focused
training is spending time on credits but
one of my coach friends Nicole
Christenson says CrossFit uh roots she's
like we don't nature for time stop
naturing for time like this we're
surfing so we can surf all day and we
can surf more waves than the other kids
cuz you're not fit enough right I want
to go hike and then ride my bike and
play and ski do all the things I want to
do with my body and that may me I want
to hold my kids or I want to do my job
in this you know in this Warehouse we're
start to train for life in a little bit
more simple way and it doesn't feel like
this crazy burden and it also happens to
be the best tool to understand how
you're moving because my expert coaches
can watch you run and be like that's
what we're working on and I'll go right
to the thing right but for the rest of
us we need to say wow my shoulder that
bench that fly dumbbell bench was a
little bit tricky I'm losing sh shoulder
extension right or at least I'm touching
these shapes and that ends up being a
really interesting diagnostic tool where
we can really take a shot at improving
function and reducing muscular skeletal
distress yeah and I and I think this is
the this is the template for it yeah
enjoying your training and including
enjoying training hard is one of the the
best things one can do years ago when I
was skateboarding I mean I ruined
skateboarding for myself because got
picked up out of sympathy to be fair by
a couple sponsors and then got obsessed
with the fact that you know I wasn't
progressing then broke my foot and you
know pretty soon I didn't hate it I
loved it and I loved the community but
it turned into something else and had I
just St taken a step back from it and
said all right I'm decent at this I
could get better and I'm just going to
focus on doing it for pleasure and make
a living some other way I'd probably be
doing you know like you know front side
inverts and pools now and then and
unfortunately I'm not I'm I'm lucky if I
get a nice little front side grind on
coping but whereas with Fitness
resistance training running I I love
resistance training running the cup of
coffee before my workout tastes 10 times
big as I'm going to work out I I love to
use it as an opportunity listen to music
listen to podcasts there's so much
that's in and around it that's still
just pure pleasure even on the days when
I'm like at 95% of output or 100% of
output or 80% of output I'm like I just
I'm having so much fun that's right and
I can't wait to get back in there so
when we're we are looking at Society
Health right the first thing we argue
instead of saying what's most important
we say what is it you want to do and who
are your friends are going to do it with
and are you going to do it a lot let's
start there then we can start to weasle
in everything especially with social
isolation with sort of lack of community
I mean I feel like sport is the last
place where people congregate right
Sports Sidelines this is the sort of you
know lingua franka of the whole you know
world I've taught on every continent
except Antarctica everyone knows what a
push-up is everyone knows what a
deadlift is it's not science sorry it's
not math that's not the universal
language it is bansch press everyone
knows and everyone can tell you how much
you bench in any language so there are
some things there that are Universal and
I think when we look at the human as a
moving
organism then we can really start to not
feel crazy about how our world is
changing but how do we fight back by
setting up more opportunity to to move
more and and for me the the whole lens
ends up being like we basically we're
trying to parse through complex problems
so I have a world champion who's injured
um two-time world champion isn't able to
finish a tour you know the first
question I ask them is tell me about
your sleep I'm a rough sleeper oh tell
me more about that right because I can't
even tell your inputs and outputs unless
we're getting into sleep then I say well
tell me about your nutrition I eat clean
great to find that for me I don't even
know what that means clean turns out
underc calori under nutrition doesn't
get enough macros doesn't get enough
micros I'm like oh we start to correct
that we start to collect sleep when we
really start to divide some of the
behaviors into for me as a as a 51y old
I'm obsessed with my tissues not failing
like tearing Achilles is like every
physical therapist worst nightmare and I
jump rope every day and I have great
range I do so many isometrics I'm just
not going to tear my achilles now I'm
going to tear my kill but I'm not going
to tear my so tissue health is part of
that so now I have to look at nutrition
I I have to look at my blood work and I
have to look at my sleep right so that I
can really Define some of those things
as that creates a Readiness tissue
tolerance Health then I can be looking
at the other things and that's really as
we start to get again the framework of
sport or framework of play creates this
place where I can suddenly start to
understand inputs and outputs and how to
take care of this carcass so that I can
do what I want with my body which is our
new definition of Mobility can I do what
I want with my body and can I be
painfree
am I correct in my very non-scientific
assessment of Instagram accounts whereby
when I see a 80 to 100 year old person
moving well that person tends to be
doing something sort of gymnastics
related there's this incredible video of
a guy Chinese guy very tall Chinese guy
doing essentially skin the cat and then
into a pull up skin the cat people can
look it up um doesn't involve actual
cats hopefully um it should
uh 85-year-old uh woman sprinting so
we're talking gymnastics type movement
sprinting movement um rarely sometimes
it'll be somebody in a gym lifting a
heavy weight but more often than that
it's gymnastic type movement pullup dip
parallel bar balance beam
sprinting is that what got them there or
is that just the expression of what
genetics do they feel safe show me
nutrition show me their training age but
what's noticeable there is that we have
disciplines that require greater range
of motion and skill of body control and
high power output right huh so one of
the things that we do in our programming
for adults is I make you sprint once a
week like Sprint because people have not
sprinted and I don't mean you can go out
and run I don't think you're capable of
that but I'm going to put you on a bike
I'm going to put you in control and I'm
going to see what your Peak wattage is
that sprinting so ideally I would love
you to be able to do some heel Sprints
and repeats but I don't think you have
the tissue tolerance or the range of
motion for that and I know what the the
outcome is going to be but I can put you
on a bike and say can we hit this peak
wattage and what you just discovered
there was hey I still need to maintain
my ability to move quickly and have
control through great ranges of motion
that is a recipe for you know why if you
did yoga and did some Sprints you're
going to be pretty badass you know
that's a pretty good way and why people
who just do the elliptical and the
little uh little small dumbbells are
they're they're fooling themselves it's
a lot of busy work there's a lot of busy
work out there it makes people feel like
they're involved in a program again the
way we want to take our feelings out of
it how do you progress those pink
dumbbells th000 reps is 2,000 reps right
show me progression suddenly I can't
progress and regress those things the
other thing I want to say is like is it
making the thing better what are we
training for and you know I I think it
it feels decorative to have busy work
and I do all this prehab corrective
exercise I'm like hold up why don't we
do the thing we're doing and regress and
progress that and ask if you have native
range of motion yes or no but you know
if we look at the typical person
especially someone listening to this
podcast they don't have two hours in the
gym so if your program is requiring two
hours of me I'm out if it requires an
hour of me I might be out you know I'm
so busy that sometimes I lots of 30 and
40 minute pieces pepper throughout plus
a lot of other play and that's good
enough so we really do need to look at
how people are finding themselves in
their environments to ask is this
appropriate for you and what's essential
and it turns out a lot of this you know
20-some playing around videoing yourself
in the gym is great when you have three
or four hours in the gym yeah listening
to an entire album or podcast or um book
chapters in sequence I think is if I may
far more valuable than um allowing
oneself the opportunity to text and be
on social media during a workout because
it just becomes a very distracted thing
I think that the workout of any kind is
also an opportunity for building
concentration and one can listen to
podcasts or books Etc but or an album
sequentially through but I find at least
for myself if if I work out in a way
that's interrupted by social media or
texting or email because it's available
there that it carries through into the
rest of the day that I'm more distracted
I believe you how about that I believe
you and that's what's so great is you're
like hey that doesn't work for me you
know um I find that my best thinking is
done under enormous aerobic load like I
literally am like oh and I have an often
will jump up and write something on the
Whiteboard and then go back and do my
thing because you know I'm just it
creates Flow State and it's and if I'm
distracted I can't really hear what's
going on and that's there's a time when
I want to distract myself you know and
there's a time when I want to be amused
that's fine you know I've got to
two-hour ride getting ready for a 4-day
Backcountry ski trip here in February
but notice I've already been getting
ready for it for in the beginning of
November I am ready it's taking me going
to ramp up and so much of my training
now is is going towards can I
successfully do these four hard days the
way I want to so some things come down a
little bit strength dials down I change
my body composition I'd like to be a
little bit lighter I'm playing but
there's some times where I have to get
two and three hours in of steady work
done and I'm like headphones you know
what I mean so it's okay to be amused
you don't have to be a monk doing what
you're doing but I really like what you
said feels I feel distracted yeah let's
use this is let's use it as a
concentration time right let's use it as
an interaction time I the gym shouldn't
be the lonliest place in the world if
you're not making eye contact and
talking high-fiving get a different gym
I would be remiss if I didn't ask you
about fascia you and Jill Miller were
some of the first people that I ever
heard talk about fascia in a um in a in
an elaborate way in a way that allowed
me to finally understand what this
incredible aspect of our physiology um
the many things that it's doing I
realize this is a vast discussion that
we could take several more hours but I'm
not a fascia researcher right and yet I
think as I recall you're one of the
first people to talk about you know that
the relationship telling people what
that there's fascia that we have this
thing called fascia um clearly an
important part of our our physiology our
ability to move to what extent do you
think that
um tight fascia quote unquote I'm
probably offending many people in this
moment tight fascia restricts our
movement and that working on fascial
release if or or manu mobilization thank
you um can allow us to move better maybe
better posture maybe even feel better
there are a lot of theories um some
probably wrong some probably right about
what fascia can and can't do for us but
what are some things about fascia that
you find particularly interesting that
you'd like to pass
along I think what we should do is if
you pull fascia out of the human
movement equation human doesn't fails to
stop moving right so the recent like
we've just discovered fasha like that's
not really entirely true um there's an
really like 20year old set of videos by
a guy who's he describes himself as a
Soma uh his name is Gil Headley and he
did these live dissections on the
YouTube I don't even know if it's still
there but he basically did all of this
gross anatomy for free on the internet
and he describes one of the first people
really describe fascia as this sort of
incredible you know connective tissue
Network that envelops wraps you know
stores energy communicates is
intentionality in full disclosure I went
to school in Boulder and I may have
dated a girl who went to raling school
and was a roler and Ida Ral was one of
the first people to really talk about
how can we mobilize fascia with touch so
I was introduced to fascia in the 90s
when I had raling done on me so when I'm
trying to help someone think about pain
a restore position and this is overly
gross but it'll it'll create a framework
for people we ask is this an
environmental problem are you poorly
hydrated because your tissues need to be
hydrated to slide are you inflamed like
that's why we talk about nutrition and
we talk about sleep okay so we have this
environmental piece then I I often will
say hey do we have just a movement
problem do you just have crappy
technique like let's fix the technique
first let's get you moving to the
highest expression of the movement first
hey turn your foot straighter let's
let's let recate that joint can we can
we have a better organization then we
start to say because sometimes it's just
a movement problem just you needed some
queuing we say is this a joint capsule
problem because capsule stiffness The
Joint capsule is a bag of connect tissue
that surrounds all your joints and it
can account for huge chunks of your
range of motion limitation so a lot of
we do is we after we try to mobilize a
joint tissue and again that's my own
bias the way I was trained as an
Australian trained manual therapist this
mland school then we say well is this
just a good oldfashioned muscle
restriction and we call it muscle
Dynamics cuz that includes High tone
stress fear but trigar points are well
documented phenomenon muscles get stiff
they become fibrotic right you could
have high tone trying to protect you all
those reasons but that still could limit
your range of motion and lastly we say
sliding surfaces so instead of kind of
talking about all the different layers
of dermis and skin and fascia we say do
the things that slide should are they
sliding so if you grab your skin on your
forehead it should slide in all the
directions notice the skin should slide
all the directions over your tendons
right if I grab your typical person's
Achilles and grab the skin over the
Achilles it doesn't budge it's like they
have an exoskeleton that's that fascial
kind of compartment and it's seized it's
adhered it's bound to the underlying
surfaces which creates tissue
restriction and higher tension so when
we're mobilizing these tissues we're
trying to keep tissues sliding and
gliding that's an easy way of think
about it nerves have to run through
nerve tunnels taking huge breaths keeps
all of those you know aspects of your
trunk moving and we just need to be
thinking in like a systems approach so
sometimes if you went and saw an art
practitioner and it didn't solve your
problem is this Active Release therapy
yeah okay it may not have been a fasal
problem right if you went and saw
someone who only worked on the muscles
it may not have been a muscle problem if
you went saw a chiropractor and they
worked on your on your joint joint
structures right or a good physio it may
not be a joint restriction problem if
you saw a coach and they couldn't queue
you out of it it may not have been a so
what we need to do is we recognize that
if more squats just solved all the
problems wouldn't we have solved all the
problems if rolling on a roller had
solved all the problems seems like we
would have solved all the problems so I
think what ends up happening is we want
to put fascia equally as an important
part of the system and one of the ways
that we can directly impact that in a
free way at home is to begin a
conversation of just some simple
myofascial mobilization in fact
myofascial means muscle fascial but
there are osteop fascial connections
does the fascia you Glide over the bone
there right we can look at the the the
tendonous fascial connections and again
do these tissues slide and glide the way
they're supposed to slide and glide and
that's a much easier way to look at it
and I'm going to test and retest not
with subjective pain but how is your
range of motion and access to your range
of motion thank you for that I've um
Wanted to try roling for a long time and
then a friend of mine who's a former
Seal Team operator told me that at some
point during the roll thing that he
received that they put a glove on and
went up his nostril and did some fascial
relief on the release excuse me on the
inside of his nose and it quote it was
the most painful experience he ever had
and I was like all right well I don't
know if you know anyone in Naval special
Warfare but they are they are so soft
right I didn't say that Kelly said that
um you know who you are my friends but I
you know that I I confess um you know
it's not like I avoid pain at all costs
but that that made me think that um I
might not want to do roling I also don't
want someone putting their finger up my
nose so I'm assuming that I could say
hey I want I want try roll thing and I
don't need to get because you hear this
stuff like oh you know there's all this
emotional release which you know there
are other ways to get that the um I
guess is it always painful is the
question does it need to be painful his
statement is pretty pretty M so pull
let's pull ring out the side because I'm
not a raler but let's just say that
mobilizing your tissues doesn't have to
be painful in fact it's likely that
you'll experience some discomfort but
let's talk about a couple guideposts for
you number one you always have to be
able to take a full breath right so if
I'm mobilizing you or you're mobilizing
yourself and you suddenly stop breathing
you're going too deep so an easy way for
you is to say hey do I have can I
Breathe Here number two
I like to have volutional contraction so
if I'm mobilizing someone or someone's
doing something I should be able to flex
them out I should have control over that
if the pain or depth or pressure is
putting too much load on the system
where I literally lose normal muscular
control what am I doing right and then
you know those two pieces can I take a
breath here do I have control here those
go a long way to keeping me in the
bounds and then we tend to not work on a
tissue longer than 5 minutes just
because I want to get the rest of it
tomorrow and if you give me 10 minutes
to work that's incredible we like to put
the soft tissue work before we go to bed
and what we found was that we had better
adherence no one's doing anything
productive in then 10 minutes before
they go to the bedroom number two like a
child when you put a child to bed you're
like first do we take a bath and we read
the book then we go to bed right your
brain is like I know what comes next so
if you do this rolling or on your some
soft tissue work self
massage you are training your brain to
know what comes next we find that when
people have engaged in massage or self-
massage they don't stand up and want to
fight anyone they're very relaxed if
you've ever gone to a spa and had a
massage you don't go out and snatch or
get into a fight afterwards you're so
chill bro so we found it as a great way
to as Jill Miller says switch on the off
switch that's a beautiful way of talking
about that how do I tell myself to shift
out of this you know fight or flight
into coming down 5 minutes per body part
start anywhere on the leg start any
what's stiff what's asking can I breathe
can I contract you're going to see that
that's a really simple way to start
getting same input and not all your
tissues are the same if you come to me
with knee pain I'm going to want to be
able to look at your R your positions
but I'm also going to want to be able to
stay on your quads I mean my full body
weight and if you can't take that I'm
calling that incomplete and those people
out there who are going to be like whoa
that's heavy duty you have not worked
with my population who have monster
thighs on are thick and fibrotic and it
takes real weight so we all have
different sensitivities but if I respect
your ability to take a breath and
contract then all of a sudden we're
we're we're upregulating what I
recommend is you go to Thailand you get
a thae massage from a 65-year-old master
woman who is weighs 109 pounds and when
she is working on your quads and you tap
out she's like no I'm not done here if
you felt your quads you're going to
realize how low the bar is all right
um heat and cold you were one of the
first people that told me Hey listen
Cold's great cold plunges cold showers
are great for shifting your State uh for
resilience training um fun it's fun um I
swam with L's pool this morning did the
breath hold cold lapse it's fun I'm
going to put in quotation marks yeah
sometimes it's type too fun um it
definitely will shift one's state for
many hours afterwards for reasons we Now
understand but you were one of the first
people to point out to me that for
injuries often times it's better to
profuse the tissue and that heat
sometimes perhaps is the more favorable
tool if you had to pick one that's
right so what you I think even talked
about that there is research to show
that cold water
immersion can attenuate training effects
if done in the six to8 hours after
hypertrophy and strength training
because of its potent anti-inflammatory
properties prevents some of the
inflammation that would prompt the
adaptation response and put simply if
your goal is bigger muscles and getting
stronger don't do immersion based
deliberate cold exposure in the six to
eight hours after your training fine to
do it on other days fine to do it
beforehand in fact athletes at Stanford
do that on the basis of a lot of work
from Craig heler and others F to not do
it at all if you don't want to do it
again I'm not a I'm not a um uh I'm not
going to die on The Sword of of cold
plunging um but it can attenuate or even
prevent those adaptations but at other
times it's a great tool for reducing
inflammation shifting one's mental and
physical state in the great Direction
look it always sucks to get in the thing
the whole point is you feel much better
when you get out than you did before you
ever got in that's the simplest way to
put it I a middle-aged guy who wants to
be the best middle-aged mountain biker
in my neighborhood is my timing of my
plunge going to affect my ability to be
that mediocre athlete no so stop
people are like when's the optimal time
I'm like when's it work for you does is
that first thing in the morning Juliet
found that if she got hot and plunged in
the night she was like woken up and
fired up and red she like I'm not going
to sleep now and I get hot and cold hot
and cold it's like someone hits
emergency break right so first of all
when does it work for you right second
of all if there is a performance concern
we try to put it as far away from
training as we can that's what we say
training in the evening plunge before if
you like you train the the morning
morning Plunge in the evening like get
cold that's cool but what you hinted at
is the same reasons why we don't ice
injuries because it limits our body's
ability to to heal so it rate limits and
it might do it by phasal constriction
your body eventually your body is going
to warm up anyway so one of the things
we like to say is your body either heals
at the rate of a human being or it heals
slower so there's no such thing as a
fast healer you're just oh you're really
good at healing at the rate of human
physiology and the rest of us are doing
dumb things that are Li rate limiting
our healing nutrition sleep right when
we are talking about anyone after
surgery or injury our Benchmark in the
Line in the Sand is8 hours of laying in
bed without looking at your phone that's
minimum and I don't care if you're
sleeping because resting is the next
best thing but I can't actually
understand inputs and outputs and let me
be super clear if you're trying to grow
a body learn a skill change your body
composition get stronger heal that all
rhymes with eight hours we look seven as
our minimum and of course you're human
being you're going to get by I was
stressed out last night wanted to come
on this show with my friend Andrew and
do a good job like I didn't get great
sleep but I'm a human being I'm still
going to show up so what's nice then is
we can start to say okay what can we
control in terms of managing and
upregulating boosting maximal healing
rate for humans and it turns out cold
water may not be the best icing
something might suppress prostag gland
in release
right which means that you can think of
it as you have these circulating stem
cells and again sorry everyone get this
just very cursory and we need the
chemical signalers from the injured
damaged tissue to call those things to
be but if I ice that and suppress that
those some of those cells can go
swinging on past there was a great study
I saw a million years ago and it looked
at ibuprofin usage in Australian
military tactical athletes who had bad
ankle sprains and
those athletes who are given ibuprofen
which does the same thing as ice
suppresses prostag gland release right
cuts off some of those chemal signals
were back faster than their counterparts
who did not have the ibuprofen but they
had chronic ankle instability because
they did not have a sufficient healing
response because they had shut that
healing response down so what we find is
look your body will wait until you it
warms back up but if you think you're
going to do angine neogenesis and make
new capillaries and modulate all these
things by slapping a non-specific ice
pad for a non-specific amount of time
over a non-specific tissue you got to be
kidding me and so it's really Mickey
Mouse does ice help for margaritas that
are warm yes open heart surgery yes
right waking you up in the morning
waking you up in the morning hey I have
a kid who needs a placebo I can numb
that thing and give my kid some Placebo
ice that's great definitely can work for
pain control because as soon as you're
numb you can't feel anything but what's
going to happen when you pull that thing
off we're going to come back so we've
found that we have much better and again
instead of saying that's bad we're
turning out and saying we have so many
better tools now to manage congestion
because that's really what we're trying
to do with ice and healing is we're
trying to stop swelling right but is
swelling a mistake by the body and
chances are it's not really a mistake
again two and a half million years of
evolution this stuff's pretty awesome
but what we know is failure to move and
evacuate that swelling is a problem so
when we get people on non- fatiguing
muscle contraction nmes devices like the
h-wave or something like that we find
that we can actually decongest and keep
moving in controlled ways M and we have
much better clinical outcomes than we do
with we ice what about heating pads hot
water bottles sauna do you sit in the
sauna yes I do I love the sauna how
often are you in the sauna whenever I
can you know and sometimes it's short
sessions and sometimes it's super hot
sessions and sometimes I just get hot
and cold a couple times and I try like
you said earlier I'm not after some
specific adaptation response the Saun is
a great way for us to chill out and hang
out and sometimes we're bored and we got
to make dinner or move on so I you know
I try to sauna if there's anything I do
I sauna a lot bigger the engine the
bigger the braks then it's for me it's
such a big break you mentioned leair
I've I've seen L Drag The Assault bike
into the sauna something most people
probably shouldn't do cuz they would die
of a hypothermia but we call that
Restrepo it's the worst place on Earth
it's a it's an interesting tool though
the the heat I find that if I get the
sauna uncomfortably hot and then force
myself to
breathe super slowly only through my
nose so that I don't actually feel like
a burning sensation on the inside of my
nostrils and I just do that for um you
know 10 15 minutes that it's wonderful
stress resilience training how great is
that but very different than the cold
plunge where you can either muscle
through it or distract yourself or
whatever in the heat you know your heart
rate's going up and there's this
temptation to I'm like um to follow that
heart rate toward a a more elevated
stress State and so I find that you can
get very very hot obviously be be safe
about this folks um but still maintain a
lot of calm and I think it's a wonderful
tool but you have to kind of work at it
and I enjoy this by the way so people
are probably think here you go again
like why not just enjoy the sauna um but
I like to listen to Gregorian chants or
something in there and do this like very
like how even and calm can I stay I love
at 215 or or 220 um and I wear I wear
the cap so those higher Heats don't
don't register to the brain you you will
drive yourself out eventually your brain
is going to just I what's driv drives me
out the sa now is I wret I actually like
feel like I'm going to vomit because
I've gotten so hot my brain stem is like
bro you can just override so I'm like
got to get it and I get out of the sauna
and then you what one of the reasons I
love the cold so much we're jump in our
C our pool or cold plunges I can get
back in the son right right it's the
contrast of I try to do it once a week
Sonic cold Sonic cold Sonic once a week
you know again not training for any
specific thing except to be able to go
back to joo's house CU I did sauna at
joo's house with some family members of
HS and friends and I think they wanted
to see when I would they want to crush
you so they went I think they cranked
that thing to like
22230 and they call he got me on this
there I ended up down on the floor you
know and they were they were teasing me
because it's obviously cooler down on
the floor than it is up top and so they
call that the huberman spot the Wimpy
spot but um yeah he's a beast with the
song everyone it's not a contest and one
it is it it is in the willink household
I'll tell you it absolutely one of the
things I like about the Heat and the
cold is that it it informs me about my
Readiness State because just like my CO2
tolerance my breath holds are very short
when I'm stressed and under recovered my
heat tolerance drops dramatically and so
does my cold tolerance it's easier to
pick up really fast I start shivering
right away I'm like whoa I've been in
here for 30 seconds I'm already
shivering I'm like huh another piece of
day that says maybe I need to make it a
70% day in the gym and move I don't have
to take a day off we believe julette and
I believe in this thing called desire to
train we wake up every day like you
probably self-medicated with some
exercise as kids right and we we start
thinking about what we're going to
exercise what are we going to do we're
going to run bikes what we do what we
lift like wait when we wake up we start
thinking about when are we going to do
it and we wake up on some days and it's
not there and what we ask ourselves is
it not there why is it not there is it
me I should be there we should go train
anyway but we really try to listen to
that voice and when there's no desire to
train it's really strange how it
correlates with crap heat tolerance crap
CO2 tolerance crap cold tolerance and I
think it's a nice way of understanding
yourself from sort of a third- party
objective measure especially as you get
good at this you're like wow that really
sucked today yeah I love that I think um
assessing one's degree of kind of
forward Center of mass for for effort is
is great um I'm borrowing this analogy
from somebody else I didn't come up with
this um he said you're with all things
you're either you know back on your
heels flat footed or um forward Center
of mass and I think we've heard a lot
about you know trying to encourage
ourselves to always be forward Center of
mass what I'm hearing today is that
great to do that sometimes great
sometimes to back off but to just
explore the full range of um for lack of
a better way to put it sort of um
emotional range of motion you know yeah
and remember ultimately all this is
supposed to be additive right and it's
supposed to inoculate Me by creating a
framework that makes more
durable my body in my my my
relationships I mean we we didn't even
talk about the fact that the sauna is
like it's just glue for people it allows
people to come together I think one of
the things I've noticed with my male
friends is that it gives us a place like
once a week where we get together
because it's so hot we Al we're all
super vulnerable and we talk the truth
barel we talk with our friends and we
kind of share stories and can be talk
about our lives and so it creates a
framework for that and if that was the
benefit of the sauna I'm in just that
alone right that my wife and I feel more
connected after taking a on together I'm
like well who cares about the heat shock
proteins and Alzheimer's that's probably
important too but I like having a lot of
bottom things and I think we it's easy
for us to sort of so hyper science and
Hyper tactic things that we forget the
whole point of the brain is to be around
other brains that's it that's why the
brain exists and then those brains go do
rad in the world together and uh
sometimes it's that simple and when we
start throwing that filter on it becomes
a lot more sustainable I'm not
interested in being 110 I'm interested
in being durable enough to take the hits
on my way to 110 I love that um some of
my best friendships have been forged in
the SAA and not by pushing ourselves
necessarily just come the thing you know
it's so cool um I know that some of my
uh New Zealand teams have a Cava um they
call it recovery and sometimes they'll
share have a Cava ceremony and drink a
little Cava and then jump in the sauna
and boy really binds the boys you know
that really creates a down regulation a
fact I mean it's so you know I I think
again my own bias because I love this
stuff is that I think all of it is about
physical input so if we took a sort of
macro step back what we say is what does
your physical practice look like tell me
about your physical practice well I get
move my body and I try to eat a fruit
and some protein before I get out the
door and I walk all day long and I try
not to sit in one period of place for
all long period of time and then I get
home and if I'm lucky enough to exercise
I do and then I sat on the floor and I
roll a little bit but that's a full
practice you walked you got sunlight you
you know what I mean and that I think is
a much better way of thinking about this
versus sort of let me add another line
of code to your programming where now
you're doing three sets of 10 in this
thing what are your thoughts on
nutrition you seem to be pretty uh
balanced about this um before we started
recording you were talking about some
meatloaf recipes that sound pretty
amazing clearly you love food I'm not
going to say I'm the best at meatloaf
but I maybe seven out of 11 times Bamboo
Terrace bench
Champion I'm going to get a tattoo but
it's fine what uh you enjoy food love
food um so you're not you like to eat
and um you cook a bit as well um most
people feel I think kind of overwhelmed
oh yeah at the discussions about
nutrition now we're trying to get a gram
of protein per pound of body weight
which I subscribe to but if I'm supposed
to spread that out across the day
sometimes I'm doing that sometimes I'm
not I like fruits and vegetables did you
feel like a failure because you didn't
have ground I mean honestly if it can
feel for people like oh I didn't do it
no I think if people make getting high
quality
high protein to calorie ratio Foods as
the foundation of their diet and then
eating some vegetables and eating some
fruit whoa bro what about the peels
you're going to kill people that I love
that Ban's dangerous I'll eat the I'll
eat the orange peel if it's a really
good orange I will people who know me
I'm I've gotten some wide eyes at meals
where I'll take the lemons out of my
drink I'll just eat the whole thing down
I don't care someone will tell me why
it's going to kill me but I don't eat
the seeds while I eat the peel too um so
some vegetables fruit and then some
starches you know per energetic
requirements Andor real life like I'm
not going to stay away from the
sourdough bread because I don't need a
starch that I have a little bit of it
like you know I feel like we've lost our
rational approach to eating um because
people feel these you know these
quantifiable metrics of you know
calories and protein they're important
clearly but I've always known you to be
somebody who's very balanced about the
occasional ice cream yes steak but also
vegetables I mean a why do you think
that theut nurition conversation has
gotten so distracted even contentious
and B what do you do and you know if you
were going to raise a kid you've raised
kids if you're going to raise a kid and
and say Here's what like balanced
nutrition looks like to you okay I'm not
calling you nutrition to you how do you
see this picture but what I I want to
point out is that if we're going to have
a conversation remember my my real job
day job is high performance I'm going to
have to talk about body composition and
I'm going to have to talk about fueling
do you have enough carbs on board to do
what we're going to do are you eating to
recover to reduce the session cost right
how do we minimize the sort of the
physiologic cost of this training this
competition and that's all wrapped
around nutrition nutrition I already
hinted at I'm going to have to talk and
ultimately ask you get a blood panel and
look at make sure that you have
everything on board so that your tissues
are tissues and can handle the loading
we're prescribing them so I didn't want
to get into
nutrition at all because it's always
about body composition for me and I'm
like that's the most boring reason why
we uh Sean Stevenson uh wrote a
beautiful book about creating a table
culture and a culture on eating for your
family so for me the functional unit of
change is the household that's the place
where I want to make and put all my
energy and time that's how we'll
transform Society one household at a
time but sitting down with your kids the
research around that eating with your
kids like twice or three times a week is
phenomenal right like cooking is is
beautiful I have to become more nuan
because if I have a team I'm working
with like uh we had a tournament two
weeks ago at Stanford we played four
games and the that's four Collegiate
nationally ranked teams that were
playing like badasses how do I fuel
those women how do I get them what do
they want to eat what makes them feel
good what makes them feel bad how do we
balance all of that like I found out
that putting food on a table with a
tablecloth increased calories again as a
high performance for me I'm like how are
the ways that I can be thinking about
this from a practical standpoint my
personal thing is that we focus on
trying to create this has been really
useful for Julia and I an objective
measure 08 to1 grams of protein which
means I don't measure anymore I'm per
pound of body weight I'm 51 years old
per pound of body weight so what does
that mean means that I really try to
prioritize protein every meal super
simple and I try not to eat one protein
I try to eat all the proteins right
that's probably better I try not to
choose personally very fatty proteins
because my genetics don't really support
it if I want to see triglycerides and
and things go through the roof then I'll
you know watch me eat eggs and butter
and steak like keto gives me diarrhea so
what I'll say is I try to go for leaner
proteins there and then on the fruits
and vegetables because I think we have a
real problem with not enough
micronutrients again talking about
tissue health and definitely not enough
fiber those are huge problems and if I
get 800 gram of fruits and vegetables
this is a a nutrition strategy promoted
by our friend e sinowski of at optimiz
me nutrition she put this 800 gram
challenge based on some research and it
changed everything because suddenly I
was I was like oh my God I got to eat
more food I have to eat more fruits and
vegetables and I was stuffing myself
with fruits and vegetables getting
enough protein that I was like uh I
guess there's no room for a cookie you
know and what I really liked about that
it was agnostic about your cultural
preferences it didn't matter if you're a
vegan didn't matter if you're vegetarian
didn't matter if you were carnivore you
want to do carnivore plus berries knock
yourself right out it gave people
permission to have their food identities
but it also the met the minimums and
then we can dose up and dose Down based
on what your performance needs are and
this is 800 gram not of carbohydrate
this iseg 800 gram of like four Big
Apples gotcha a banana is like 80 to 100
gram okay yeah if you want to be real
dangerous you ate eight eight bananas
today you could die I mean you could die
and um a big salad with you know Les
cucumber tomato and probably probably 2
to 300 gram okay so then you you'd also
want to get some fruit maybe another
maybe some um cruciferous vegetables Etc
check this out again I'm just going to
do some boy math here Starbucks cookie
delicious really 300 c 300 calories I'm
going call it delicious right a pound of
cherries is 230 calories so eat a pound
of cherries and tell me you're like ah I
still want something sweet a pound of
melon was it like 220 calories a pound
of melon so calorically not very
dense right but nutritionally super
dense so we're end up loading a ton of
more food on and it really does
prioritize those things and from a
performance standpoint one of our
friends is this incredible nutritionist
at at Michigan football Abigail is
amazing there and she will tell me about
how she's using nutrition as
intervention for sports performance and
she'll have men come up to her and say
Abigail I pooped today and they're she's
like yeah that's great you know you
should poop every day and they're like
no no you understand I I pooped
yesterday too and it's the first time
these kids have pooped consecutively
they don't poop regularly and I think
again if I'm just trying to get out in
the weeds and talk about what's normal
and not normal we should talk about you
didn't eat fiber and she's like wait
until you poop twice in one day and they
were like that's crazy never in my whole
life what was the difference is they
started eating fruits and vegetables and
fiber and when we start to create those
benchmarks it's a lot easier for me to
see inputs and outputs and then we can
argue about can you choke down 100 grams
of carbs an hour because you're my Elite
cyclist you know I think you'd be
shocked at how my a lot of my athletes
have changed their relationship around
food because it serves their needs it's
not their identity around control and
it's something that Julie and I have
been very cautious of is if you have two
daughters just speaking we're really
concerned about creating dysfunctional
patterns or relationships to food
because in this Fitness space it can be
real
gnarly yeah I see the progression from
you know sitcoms of the type that we
grew up on to reality TV shows to social
media where social media can do so much
good um educationwise Etc connection but
it's basically a a reality TV show that
everyone's been able to cast themselves
in if they want
and certain characters are casting their
you know physique certain fers are
casting their outrageous behavior and
you know we's all in this reality TV
show called social media I I think
that's really the the best way to
describe it you know when people start
to feel like oh wow the these people are
getting attention for this reason or
that reason it it um creates a
gravitational pull toward people
behaving a certain way and then
obviously um some of that can be really
self-destructive um do you win health I
mean this is a great question I ask
people so like you shredded Down super
dysfunctional eating you can't go out
and eat with friends you don't drink
anything with calories like it's really
gnarly to be hyper lean and then what
I'll say is when you took your shirt off
did you win Instagram did you win
because you got another 6070 years on
this planet how does that work we don't
really dieet we'll manipulate macros to
take weight on put weight off players in
season out of season you we'll have
we'll have really good athletes say I
think I should lose four pounds the next
two weeks for this thing and I'm like
hold up I'm not going to put you in
another stressor when our we're trying
to like let's go ahead and talk about
body composition after the season but
ultimately when we really get people on
board with how food has the potential to
enrich their relationships how fun it is
to cook how fun it is to prep how fun it
is to serve other people then we have
this really different relationship with
fueling and that's that's really
remarkable but it is really easy to say
I won and I'm like okay so this 90-day
fast there are so many Fitness things
out there where they start with a fast
or brutal calorie restriction and I'm
like that's your jam to get people lean
fast is just to slam off the calories
like we know what's going to happen how
many people have done some kind of
30-day 90-day thing and the next day
it's like they're off the rails so if
you're doing some body recomp and then
you're off the rails for me I'm like I
don't think that was very good because I
got a this is a long season we're
playing I think it's I have to be
careful here because I realize this gets
into some issues when I did an episode
about uh anorexia I learned that first
of all anorexia has existed for
centuries um this idea that it's more
prominent now with social media actually
the numbers don't bear out um what does
bear out is that it is the most deadly
the most deadly by far of all the
psychiatric illnesses Oh see it leads to
death in in in a far greater uh
percentage of cases than any other
psychiatric illness including bipolar
where people often commit suicide a
great great much higher percentage of
people commit suicide who are bi bipolar
Etc so it's it's a really serious thing
and yeah we assume that social media has
made that worse but there's this now
cluster of all these different eating
disorders that don't qualify as
full-blown anorexia neosa sort of like
ADHD now we understand people are having
attention deficit issues that might not
be clinical ADHD but that cluster around
it in like people's adults and
children's inability to hold their
attention on an idea or topic for any
appreciable amount of time so it's a
very serious thing I love that
today you've talked about enjoying your
training like really enjoying your
training all aspects the resistance part
the cardiovascular part the mobility
part you know the in the evening getting
down on the floor also enjoying eating
with people enjoying the sauna I mean I
think you know people see the big guy
that you are the the amazing track
record you have of working with all
these incredible athletes and you're
you're quite accomplished athlete
yourself and I think this is the first
time for me anyway that I realize like
you you are thinking about how to make
this whole thing pleasurable and mesh it
with real life which I'm realizing now
shouldn't come as a surprise because you
have a family a flourishing family in
addition to a flourishing business with
the ready State and and so forth I think
if there's one message that really comes
through over and over again today it's
like how can you make Fitness and
Nutrition and health part of your life
but not let it take over your life or
your mind in a way that isn't
healthy yeah um thank you for that and
if that's coming across at all I think
we're we're doing a better job and I
would say certainly tempered as I've
gotten more reasonable you know I think
we get older and you can see a little
bit more of the Horizon and you you know
you start to wrap your hands around how
are we going to solve these problems in
these different places and what is
sustainable you know I really think that
that's you know we see quick inputs and
outputs that are high levels of sports
performance and simultaneously again I I
want to take those lessons and transmute
them to my own household in a really
sustainable fun way the nutrition piece
is such a a dangerous one and young
right now jul and I are very obsessed
with youth sports and spending time with
seeing if we can improve that experience
for families so they come out unharmed
and you know Red's relative energy
deficiency and Sport you know is where
we start to see that kids are not eating
enough to fuel activity and their
growing bod simultaneously and it's
really hard on their physiologies and we
it starts to show up with loss periods
it starts to show up with stress
fractures right and we start to see sort
of this some de degradation in sort of
the the body's tissues but can really
crash a lot of problems and you know
Stacy Sims is probably the first person
to really put it on my radar of hey
you're a physio coach I need you to
become an expert with the people that
you're working with you know are you
eating enough support and and I see the
some of the elite women I work with
Elite women really battle this is what
the body I need to get paid and to win
World Championships and that's not the
body that people want on the Instagram
and you know you know should I have a
salad after this training I'm like we
just played for 3 hours no you're not
going to eat a salad like go get this
big ass burrito and then we'll talk
about your salad next you know so it
sounds like the athletes are undereating
and my understanding anyway the
statistics
which I know is confusing but you know
potentially not thinking about food at
the right times and within the general
population of non-athletes especially
youth however it seems that people are
overc consuming calories so there seems
to be two two populations clustering out
here we have a this reminds me we have a
rule at our our house for dinner we have
a three vegetable rule uh this is from a
woman we work with Margaret Garvy who
cooks a protein whatever that is and has
also three vegetables and that's where
she starts
and we have I had one daughter who is
like Gourmet Chef Georgia is just a
total badass you know G and then I have
Caroline who is the pickiest human being
on the like is brown I'm not e you know
and and she's getting better but when we
had three vegetables suddenly what we
saw was that she might eat one right and
we could start to have exposure but I
think if we crowd out some of the
because I we don't want to have a
restrictive house right but you know if
we crowd out some of the other Foods um
we found it was a lot easier for us to
say this is what we're eating and we eat
this together as a family and then if
those other Foods I mean your teenagers
are going to leave the house and eat
whatever they want just just be clear
everybody so you might as well stuff
them with the good stuff at
home I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you
about supplements um these days we hear
a lot about creatine creatine creatine
creatine I I like creatine been taking
it for years um we'll occasionally do a
wash out where I just kind of let let a
bunch of water out of my body why not
and then get back to it I I won do it
for any specific reason I just do it I
travel and forget to bring creatines I'm
okay yeah but most of the time I'm
taking 5 to 10 grams a day okay um we've
heard about the Body Benefits the brain
benefits um for athletes and just quote
unquote exercisers the typical person
listening to this podcast um do you
recommend creatine what are what are
some of the things that in your
household I'm I'm getting this picture
and I've been in your home and I I will
say that the spirit in your home is a
wonderful one um Brian Mackenzie and I
showed up more or less unannounced at
one point and like the there's it's a
it's a delightful thing like people's
Spirits are it's a space station it's a
it's a space station of stoke and like
you want to be part of it you can come
in thank you it's a it's a great
environment and um it was very warming
to see that and and the way that you
embrace all these different aspects of
life and you're it's busy and it's
hectic and it's fun and people care for
one another and they're direct with one
another but in a way that's really
supportive it's really a in my mind a
great model for for a home and and it's
really uh it stayed with me and it's
really a pleasure to reflect on
yeah it's a team effort in there for
sure so um I'll just ask this what
supplements do you think are um if not
necessary then highly desirable for most
people and then for athletes and maybe
because we get this question a lot now
especially after Stacy came on the
podcast for your the female athletes you
work with um in particular are there
supplements that um add on to that that
initial batch so I think we we can
divide these things of
like in to food like things right and
then sort of performance yeah like whey
protein it's just a protein replacement
high high quality high protein to
calorie ratio that's right and if you
don't handle wayy like my athletes I'm
like let me introduce you these
vegetarian proteins and that's because
you're having a hard time timing your
meals or just getting enough protein
because you sometimes you just don't
feel like it so great great utilization
there um for
Caroline she gets omegas at night cuz
she doesn't want to have any accidental
fish burp at school she's a teenager so
she takes them before she goes to bed
and we're really interested in brain
health and there's some early research
and again not my expertise that I've
heard of read about talked to people
about that vitamin D creatine and omegas
might help attenuate symptoms of
concussion if they they get hit right so
post pre so those things are on Caroline
she gets creatine every day she gets an
Omega every day and she gets vitamin D
and some of that is probably get S
vitamin D during the summer because we I
could pull it out but we live in
northern climbs and they're indoors and
there's good research supplement I think
Dan Garner had a great piece just
talking about vitamin D supplementation
in the military and the decrease of like
risk of of of fractures in the foot just
with vitamin D so that's the start for
me I take a good multi because I'm like
I'm just going to cover the basis you
know and um then you can look I think
the next sort of veillance of interest
is have you had a blood panel how are
your vitamin B levels is there anything
we need to do based on your environment
or your genetics and then I think it
gets real in the weeds past that and
again play around with that uh one of my
super smart friends was like I think you
should take a Statin a small dose Statin
once a week and I was like all right so
I was like better take some Cokey 10
with that it's an experiment I'm running
right downsides are low I'm getting my
blood panels talk to my physician but so
CoQ10 is on the menu for me just to make
sure I don't have anything and so I
think suddenly what we should be looking
at is how do I round out my family
doesn't eat fish so we're not getting
enough s of Megos from those sources and
no one will eat Walnuts but I'm the only
one to eat Walnuts so you know how do I
round out my nutrition with some
supplementation and is there a benefit
for some other things that with my
genetics or with what's going on like J
has a mutated mtfhr Gene right and so we
are always watching B vitamins for her
right so because poor meth right poor
methat exactly right J star is his wife
that's right sorry jay
stizzle CEO you guys have such an
awesome relationship you guys have Pok
fun in one another you're clearly
awesome companions to one another and
you do great great work together I am uh
the broken anchor of the relationship I
like so she is uh you know what's really
interesting is I have
I'm a little bit like you I think I'm
excitable I get obsessed with things
it's super fun go down rabbit holes I
like to experiment and jar is like the
true north like no that sounds fishy
we're not doing that you know like I
came home one time and I was like you
know
what this cow's milk is out of here our
family is only drinking goat milk I only
had the best goat milk I just had the
best goat milk and Julet was like sure
that's going to and I gave some goat
milk to Georgia and she's like hucked it
across the room she's a baby and then I
the goat milk and like vomited into the
sink and I had goat milk on my lip and I
and Juliet just is so patient by saying
huh I wonder if that's a good idea I
wonder if you will will stick around so
so she's the rudder she is 100% the
rudder she is a three-time world
champion everyone she's mut she's a
rower at Cal and she is my training
partner she's the greatest training
partner ever had we use training as
another way of spending time together
love it thanks for sharing a little bit
of the picture of your home it matches
exactly my experience um and uh chaos a
little bit of chaos and a ton of love
and um I've been quoting him a lot
lately uh I cannot take any credit for
this but Naval who is you know famous on
uh various podcasts he says um you know
what what are we really shooting for in
life it's um a fit energetic body this
is nval not me by the way he said fit
energetic body a calm
mind and resources we got to have
resources and a home full love so I
don't know from yeah I think that's the
list spend the rest of your life working
on those and you're going to have a
really it's going to be really fun and I
I just want to remind people you hear me
say it again that they should all be
enjoyable and it is fun to track it's
also you know which which devices am I
wearing right now I'm not wearing a
single device you know because I want to
feel and sometimes I track and sometimes
I don't track and how am I feeling and
ultimately everything is really coming
down to how do I come to understand my
own process and my interaction with the
world process I think I'm getting better
at 5 wanted of knowing I don't need six
cookies and I really need to get more
fruits and vegetables and sleep and I
don't need a device to tell me that love
it well Kelly do
starett thank you so much for coming on
here today and sharing with us so much
wisdom we covered so much you covered so
much I mean pelvic floor fascia cold
heat movement patterns you give us a ton
of practical tools getting down on the
floor sit stand and on and on um but a
small portal into the vast amount of
knowledge you have in that head of yours
and I just have to say that you know
it's been a delight today because these
little bits have come through about who
I know you to be in the in the rest of
the world this is the real world we just
happen to have microphones in front of
us the rest of the world and you've been
at this a while this business of trying
to help people figure out best ways to
move how to be a better athlete how to
you know improve one's Fitness how to
take a rational fun hardworking Approach
at times but also fun playful
recreational approach to this really key
aspect of our health and many key
aspects of our health so I just want to
thank you for coming here today for
doing the work that you do and um you
know you are one of the real ones as
they say oh my brother thank you so much
and and you and you walk the walk you're
strong you can go far you have fun doing
it you're a great husband and Dad and uh
you've been a great friend to me so
thanks for coming on here let's get you
back again and um just thanks for being
you my pleasure anytime and thanks all
the uh great huberman uh people that
make this thing possible it's it's
really a thing thanks my brother thank
you thank you for joining me for today's
discussion with Dr Kelly starett to
learn more about Kelly starett and the
work that he does with his wife Juliet
starett at the ready State as well as to
find links to Dr starett's excellent
books please see the show note captions
if you enjoyed today's episode with Dr
Kelly starett and you'd like to learn
more about the science of exercise
physiology and the protocols that can
best serve you in your Fitness athletic
and other goals you can go to hubman
lab.com enter the word Fitness and
Galpin g p i n into the search function
and from there you will find links in
all formats YouTube Apple Spotify to the
series that we did on exercise with Dr
Andy Galpin who is a true World expert
in this topic and it covers all the
things you could possibly imagine
related relateded to fitness and
exercise to meet your fitness and
exercise goals if you're learning from
Andor enjoying this podcast please
subscribe to our YouTube channel that's
a terrific zeroc cost way to support us
in addition please follow the podcast on
both Spotify and apple and on both
Spotify and apple you can leave us up to
a five-star review please check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast if you
have questions or comments about the
podcast or guests or topics that you'd
like me to consider for the Hu Lab
podcast please put those in the comment
section on YouTube I do read all the
comments for those of you that haven't
heard I have a new book coming out it's
my very first book it's entitled
protocols an operating manual for the
human body this is a book that I've been
working on for more than 5 years and
that's based on more than 30 years of
research and experience and it covers
protocols for everything from sleep to
exercise to Stress Control protocols
related to focus and motivation and of
course I provide the scientific
substanti
for the protocols that are included the
book is now available by pre-sale at
protocols book.com there you can find
links to various vendors you can pick
the one that you like best again the
book is called protocols an operating
manual for the human body if you're not
already following me on social media I
am hubman lab on all social media
platforms so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter threads Facebook and
Linkedin and on all those platforms I
discuss science and science related
tools some of which overlaps with the
content of the hubber Lab podcast but
much of which is distinct from the
content on the hubman Lab podcast again
that's hubman lab on all social media
platforms if you haven't already
subscribed to our neural network
newsletter our neural network newsletter
is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that
includes podcast summaries as well as
protocols in the form of brief 1 to
three-page PDFs those one to three-page
PDFs cover things like deliberate heat
exposure deliberate cold exposure we
have a foundational Fitness protocol we
also have protocols for optimizing your
sleep dopamine and much more again all
available completely zero cost simply go
to huberman lab.com go to the menu tab
scroll down to newsletter and provide
your email we do not share your email
with anybody thank you once again for
joining me for today's discussion with
Dr Kelly starett and last but certainly
not least thank you for your interest in
science
[Music]