welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford school of
medicine today my guest is Dr Jeffrey
Goldberg Dr Jeffrey Goldberg is the
chair of the Department of Opthalmology
at Stanford University School of
Medicine he is a clinician an MD or
medical doctor who sees patients every
week as well as a PhD meaning a
laboratory scientist who directs his own
laboratory focused at understanding the
mechanisms and cures for diseases of the
eye EnV Vision such as glaucoma
retinitis Pigmentosa and macular
degeneration indeed Dr Goldberg is one
of the world leaders in developing
methods to cure blindness he is also
intensely knowledgeable about all things
related to Vision so during today's
discussion we indeed cover most all of
visual and Eye Health you will learn for
instance about the benefits as well as
draw backs of wearing corrective lenses
such as contact lenses or eyeglasses for
reading you will learn about the
benefits and detriments of sunlight
meaning how it can help your vision in
fact how it can help reverse or prevent
myopia nearsightedness as well as the
things to be cautious about with respect
to sunlight in terms of development of
cataracts which are occlusions that
prevent Vision we also discuss many
tools for maintaining and improving
Vision across the lifespan r ranging
from behavioral tools so specific Vision
tasks and exercises for the eye that you
can do that are known to improve or
maintain your vision as well as specific
surgical procedures such as lasic
surgery we get into all the details of
for instance how often to do these
various eye exercises how long the
benefits are maintained as well as age
related considerations for things like
lasc eye surgery we even get into how to
best clean your contact lenses whether
or not to use disposable contact lenses
or other forms of contact lenses we also
discuss things like dry eye and the best
remedies for dry eye and we talk about
the scientific and clinical data around
nutritional approaches and
supplementation based approaches for
maintaining and improving Vision so
whether or not you suffer from floaters
or dry eye or you're considering
changing your eye prescription or you
have concerns about whether or not
relying on corrective lenses is
impairing your vision and you want to
enhance your vision or if you're
somebody who has perfect vision today's
episode is going to include science and
protocols that will be highly relevant
to you I should also add that if you are
somebody who suffers from or who has
family members who suffer from diseases
of the eye that can impact Vision such
as glaucoma retinitis Pigmentosa and
macular degeneration we also delve deep
into the discussion about the most
Advanced Technologies for preventing and
offsetting vision loss due to those
diseases as well thanks to Dr Goldberg's
incredible knowledge his Clarity of
communication and his generosity with
that knowledge by the end of of today's
episode You Will Be armed with all of
the modern information you need in order
to best maintain and improve your eye
and vision health before we begin I'd
like to emphasize that this podcast is
separate from my teaching and research
roles at Stanford it is however part of
my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to Consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is Maui Nei
venison Maui Nei venison is the most
nutrient dense and delicious red meat
available I've talked before on this
podcast about the key importance of
striving to get 1 gram of protein per
pound of body weight now when one
strives to do that it's also important
to maximize the quality protein to
calorie ratio in other words you don't
want to consume a lot of extra calories
in order to get your quality protein
Maui venison in having an extremely high
quality protein and nutrient to calorie
ratio allows you to do that very easily
and in addition to that Maui Nei venison
is delicious I particularly like their
bone broth which has an unmatched 25
gram of protein per 100 calories I also
love their ground venison and their
venison steaks all of them are
absolutely delicious if you'd like to
try Maui Nei venison go to mauii Venison
docomond and get 20% off your first
order again that's Maui venison docomond
to get 20% off today's episode is also
brought To Us by element element is an
electrolyte drink that has everything
you need that is the electrolytes sodium
magnes magnesium and potassium but
nothing you don't which means no sugar
it's critical that we get electrolytes
because every cell of our body but in
particular our nerve cells our neurons
rely on electrolytes in order to
function properly with element it's very
easy to ingest the correct ratios of
electrolytes they come in these little
packets they're really delicious you mix
them up with anywhere from 8 to 16 to 32
ounces of fluid I like mine pretty
concentrated so I'll drink a 16 o glass
of water with element in it when I first
wake up I'll also consume another one of
those maybe 32 ounces with one packet
when I exercise and maybe another one if
I happen to sweat a lot during exercise
or if I was in the sauna and sweating
lot if it's a very hot day Etc if you'd
like to try element go to drink element
that's LM nt.com huberman to claim a
free element sample pack with your
purchase again that's drink element
lm.com huberman today's episode is also
brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep
makes Smart mattress covers with cooling
Heating and sleep tracking capacity now
there's absolutely no question that
sleep is the foundation of mental health
physical health and performance when
we're sleeping well and we're sleeping
long enough everything in our daily life
goes that much better now a key
component to getting a great night's
sleep is the temperature of your
sleeping environment and that's because
in order to fall and stay deeply asleep
your core body temperature actually has
to drop by about 1 to 3 deg conversely
in order to wake up feeling refreshed
your core body temperature has to
increase by about 1 to 3Â° with eight
Sleep mattress covers you can cool or
heat your mattress at the beginning
middle and end of your night in order to
optimize your night sleep I started
sleeping on an eight sleep mattress
cover about 2 years ago and it has
dramatically improved the sleep that I
get each and every night if you'd like
to try eightsleep you can go to eights
sleep.com
huberman and save up to $150 off their
pod three cover eight sleep currently
ships in the USA Canada UK select
countries in the EU and Australia again
that's eights sleep.com
huberman and now for my discussion with
Dr Jeffrey Goldberg Dr Jeffrey Goldberg
welcome thanks it's great to be here you
and I go way back we will spare people
the discussion about all of that but I'm
really excited for today's discussion
because I get a tremendous number of
questions about vision and I health and
of course as a neuroscientist who has
worked on the visual system I sometimes
have answers or partial answers but more
often than not I don't have the answers
and yet I'm confident that you do or
that if you don't you can direct us to
the place to get those answers so to
kick things off I want to ask you what
was one of the most commonly asked
questions when I solicited for questions
in anticipation of this episode which is
how early should one do an eye exam on
their child and how regularly should we
all be doing eye
exams also is the fact that I think I
can see normally confirmation that I can
see as well as I think I can so that's
really three questions but baby comes
out do they check their eyes right away
and if so how and how often should they
check and what kind of information is
there yeah it's as it's a great question
it's obviously something that touches us
all so the qu the answer to that really
differs a little bit uh at the different
stages of Life first of all every every
baby gets an eye exam or should be
getting an eye exam and uh one of the
main things that you really just are
screening for right when that baby is
born right in the nursery right in those
first few days is to just look for a red
reflex you know when you take a camera
picture a Flash picture and sometimes
you get red eye that's actually the
light from the flash as you know
reflecting against the retina and coming
back out of your eye it looks red and um
and a red reflex is actually very normal
that's that that's great and if you have
a one of a number of diseases in the eye
that can present even in babies even in
newborn babies including most concerning
but thankfully least Comm
retinoblastoma which is the most common
pediatric eye cancer uh which again
thankfully is quite rare uh those babies
won't have a red reflex in that eye
it'll be kind of a whitish or gray
reflex and so even just that first
little you know doctors taking the
little pen light and even just flashing
it in the in the baby's eyes so that's
that's that's our first eye exam and and
hopefully we've all had that and
hopefully every baby being born today is
getting that getting that first eye exam
is really just looking for for that red
reflex uh it's not typical as long as
that's looking good um to worry about
getting an i exam from there kind of
through um childhood like uh maybe early
Elementary School unless they B your
baby is presenting with one of a number
of features that parents often pick up
on for example as the baby's aging
through those first couple of years you
know through the first couple of years
babies actually don't have great visual
Acuity and so as they're aging over
those first couple years it's normal for
them to have you know roving eye
movements for example be searching their
environment um but over those first
couple of years if parents start
noticing the baby isn't you know isn't
uh making eye contact or looking where a
sound is certainly if they have what's
called nagus like these rapid flickering
alternating eye movements uh anything
like that of course you're going to
trigger trigger an eye exam but
otherwise most babies other than their
pediatrician doing that red reflex check
when they're in for their regular well
child checks uh that's really all that's
uh needed through that when most kids
get to elementary school age there will
often be often done at the schools an
amblyopia screening exam if kids eyes
either if one eye doesn't see that well
like maybe you're very nearsighted or
farsighted in one eye and pretty normal
sided in the other or the two refractive
errors are quite different from each
other other um that can lead to a
condition you've talked about on the
podcast before called amblyopia uh which
is probably one of the more common or
most common eye diseases of
children or uh if the eyes aren't aign
you know our eye muscles and the Brain
behind them are really responsible for
keeping the two eyes looking straight
ahead and if that's not working properly
and one eye is is off-kilter and
therefore the image of what we're
looking at is falling on different spots
of the retina it's not sinking upright
in the brain
that can lead to this disease condition
called amop where that eye is no longer
talking to the brain properly and
there's a pretty easy screening exam
that can be done for strabismus the
misalignment of the eyes that kids will
do in elementary school the other main
presenting symptom if kids in elementary
school is when they admit to their
parents I can't see the board or I can't
see the teacher up front and then they
might be quite nearsighted and so that
will also trigger an exam and uh so
those are usually the parts for for
babies for toddlers for children
schoolage children that might reasonably
trigger an exam a couple of questions
about early eye exams and we'll um get
on to uh ey exams in older individuals
in a second um but I want to interrupt
you with this question so you mentioned
that um you know there can be a
misalignment of the eyes I've seen many
people's babies where there is one
eyeball that seems to be kind of
drifting around and then it might
correct but sometimes they'll have a we
don't want to get technical here but for
our listeners we'll keep it General but
they're conver convergent eyes or one
eye converging cross eyes or walyed you
know again using uh that non-technical
language here um and my understanding is
that the brain is taking that
information in and is very plastic it's
changing at these early stages of
development and that it's fairly
critical to get that stuff corrected
early on because if you wait too long
the brain can essentially become blind
to the the um or rather the the brain
cannot learn to handle the proper
alignment so in other words if a kid has
cross eyes um crossed eyes excuse me and
they're not corrected uh until their 20s
it's possible that they will never
recover normal vision whereas if you
recover if you align the eyes properly
early in development they can indeed
recover Vision how early can and should
one consider getting those eye
realignments done yeah yeah pretty much
right on what they'll do is if they
detect any eye misalignment and
sometimes parents are are good at
noticing that sometimes you take a
picture and one eye got the red eye
reflex and the other one didn't and
sometimes people notice that their kids
eyes are sort of turning in it seems
like too much um sometimes there's
what's called pseudo stabismus which is
where actually depending on your Anatomy
if you have a little extra skin sort of
on the inside corners of your eyes it
makes your eyes look turned in when
actually they're straight um but if your
eyes are actually turned in or slightly
less common in children more common in
adults this alignment turned out um it's
really important to correct that early
and the reason is as you were saying the
brain starts ignoring it it fails to
fully develop the strong connections
from the for the data coming in from one
of those two eyes into the brain and if
you pass certain sort of thresholds
during development during childhood
without correcting that connectivity
getting those two eyes to work together
properly um you can permanently lose
that um and so we use sort of we used to
use very sort of uh you know gross
numbers like it's fully correctable if
you can intervene before age three it's
partly correctable if you can intervene
before age six you got a chance before
age nine but it turns out in followon
studies that even kids into their young
teens have a shot at correcting that eye
brain connection that amblyopia that
that loss of vision uh that that can
occur during early development so even
if you're only you know unfortunately
detecting that later on in childhood or
even sort of the tween years or early
teen years it's still worth a try to
really push to um retrain the weaker eye
and then also realign the muscles so
that they can work together to keep the
eyes focused I'll tell you it's
interesting and there's a lot more to
learn about BL brain plasticity and
probably a lot of really cool new
therapies yet to discover that could
reopen what's called critical period
plasticity this this this plasticity
that we have during development that
kind of goes away as we age and and that
critical period plasticity as you know
has been the best studied actually in
the visual system and the idea that we
could reopen that is really fantastic
but for different parts of that ibrain
connection there's different periods for
critical period plasticity for example
even if you get the amblyopic eye to see
well again and then you realign the eyes
and now they're working together a lot
of kids will never recover full depth
perception stereopsis the use of two
eyes to see depth for example so why
that part of the brain doesn't correct
as well as the visual Acuity or central
vision part of the brain I'm not sure if
we understand that yet I'm gonna ask for
a curbside consult as uh it's sometimes
called right now by telling you a story
when I was a kid I went swimming without
goggles and I had one eye closed and the
other eye open and closing as it went in
and out of the water because I'm a
deficient swimmer and I only breathe to
one side unless I really consciously
forced myself to breathe to both sides
in a freestyle swim got out of the pool
and I was seeing
double it was pretty eerie and then it
became downright scary because I didn't
recover my double vision until they
patched one of the eyes forcing me to
used the other eye that had been closed
the entire time and fortunately this was
done early enough and it I was young
enough that within I think it was about
a day or so I restored what normal
vision however my depth perception is
terrible um I'm the kid that you know
Fly ball was hits me in the Outfield and
it's coming it's coming then it would
hit me this is why I've generally
focused on foot Sports throughout my
entire life as opposed to you know
precise um hand eye coordination I'm
better at throwing darts things with one
eye closed than I ever would be with
both eyes maybe that's true for most
people question I have
is is it true that even just a few hours
of misalignment of information to the
two eyes early in development can
permanently rewire the brain unless
there are some corrective measures such
as patching up one eye um and the
example I gave is just one but for
instance if um uh you know someone
injures you know gets a scratch on their
cornea and they close they patch eye and
the person happens to be 10 years old is
it important to then patch the other
healthy eye after the the um you know
the the scratched eye is feeling better
in other words how critical is it to
ensure the balance of information coming
into the two eyes even on the order of
hours or days yeah your story is uh has
some features of uh you know totally
usual how we think about misaligned eyes
leading to amblyopia where one eye is
weaker patching the strong eyes to the
weak eye can recover but not necessarily
fully regaining depth perception and so
that part of it is you know quite
stereotypical the part of your story
that's atypical is that for most kids um
an hour or two let alone minutes an hour
or two even an hour or two a day if you
were I don't know if you were a young
kid and you just really were training up
on throwing darts and you were just
keeping one eye closed to throw the
darts you know really practicing for an
hour or day it'd be very unusual for
that to trigger this kind of either
stabismus misalignment of the eyes let
alone amblyopia uh and the stabismus is
what's giving you the double vision
because they're misaligned let alone the
am amblyopia of one eye turning out
weaker if I had to guess of course not
having you know done your exam before
that fateful day in the swimming pool if
I had to guess I would guess that you
may have had some intermittent
strabismus and your brain was already
getting kind of hit and and you neither
you nor your parents may have even
noticed it it could be happening you
know at other times a day or you're not
kind of really paying attention it
doesn't kind of stand out in the way
that that that day that that you got out
of the swimming pool you really noticed
it and it may not have been that strong
it may have been quite intermittent but
if you had had some years of
intermittent esotropia or turning in of
the eyes or exotropia turning out of the
eyes that just happened here and there
but was
accumulating sort of uh damage or
failure to connect over years leading up
to that day in the swimming pool and
that day just tipped you over the edge
and you've got double vision you really
noticed it that led to an eye exam at an
eye care provider and they said wait a
second this eye is stronger this ey is
weaker you've got a little ellopia we're
going to start patching your strong eye
so you can get your weak eye back so for
99.99% of the kids who like you know
yeah they get a little corneal scratch
or they're patching one eye closed or or
uh you know and anything that's sort of
a rare event like that nothing to worry
about parents don't have to worry kids
can be kids they can play they can do
that kind of thing and uh and not have
to worry and and it's unfortunate that
we can't tell in
advance which kids been having the
intermittent amop because we don't do a
standard eye exam on every five-year-old
who's not complaining of anything but
but yeah so that's that's an unusual
case in yours and if I had to guess I I
would bet that you were having some sort
of subclinical untracked Uncharted
unnoticed maybe strabismus leading up to
that point okay great thank you you can
send me a bill at the end um along those
lines I'm 47 years old so I was um part
of the generation that grew up with some
computers in the classroom but not a lot
uh nowadays kids from a very young age
are looking at iPads and phones and
screens and things very close up and
there is a wealth of experimental animal
data showing that if you limit Vision to
just close range that the eyeball
lengthens and therefore the visual image
Falls in front of and not directly onto
the neural retina the essentially the
light sensing portion of the of the eye
and those animals become myopic or
nearsighted what can we say about the
environmental conditions in which kids
are seen from the time they're born
through let's say adolescence and their
teen years in terms of how their visual
system wires up and are there any
recommendations that are coming from the
scientific literature clinical studies
clinical trial excuse me or otherwise
that indicate what a healthy visual
environment consists of yeah yeah that's
a great question and actually it's
really relevant these days because uh
you know myopia is so
common uh it's more common um in Asian
populations you know it's called an
epidemic in China uh in California we
have a lot of Asian Heritage or
asian-americans and so we see a lot like
at Stanford we see a lot of um you know
myopia in kids and adults and really
starting to get thoughtful on the
science of myopia control how do we how
do we we provide the right environments
now what's interesting is that for
decades the Assumption some of the data
really led us to the path of thinking
like gosh the more you spend at near
activities and these are Mouse model
experiments like you describe but also
well-designed human cohort studies you
know figuring out like asking you know
kids and families like how long is your
kid reading or in front of the computer
how myopic are they how nearsighted are
they versus how much time is your kid in
front of the computer doing near work
how myopic or nearsighted are they and
these well-designed cohort studies did
Point towards this concept that if you
do too much near work as a kid that
you're more likely to develop
nearsightedness as you get through those
those sort of you know uh pre-teen and
even into the teen years which is when
most of that myopia progression or
eyeball elongation is actually happening
to cause nearsightedness
it's only been in the last few years
that some really exciting Studies have
actually pointed in a slightly different
direction and that's that maybe it's not
all not to say it's not about near
activity but maybe it's not all about
near activity maybe it's actually a
little more about the kind of light
we're getting into our eyes and I think
you've talked about this before and it's
really important when they've now
studied and asked the kids instead of
just how much near and how much far are
you doing how much time are you spending
indoors in indoor lighting which doesn't
have full spectrum light in a typical
indoor environment versus how much time
are you spending Outdoors playing in the
yard you could be reading outside but
what are you what what kind of time are
you spending
outside and and and of course when
you're outside in sunlight even it's in
direct sunlight you're getting a
different spectrum of kind of Full
Spectrum Lighting from the sun and it
looks like it's pretty clear now
actually that it has maybe more to do
with outdoor lighting time than just
near work and so I think that you know
we we've we've actually already seen the
first couple randomized controlled
trials where they're having kids
intentionally spending time Outdoors
versus sort of Standard Life which you
know is going to be often much more
indoor time and uh and seeing some
effects you follow those kids over a
couple of years and the kids who spend
time Outdoors are are progress dressing
in their nearsightedness less like their
their nearsighted prescription is not
getting as strong as the kids who are
spending more time indoors and there's
some pretty good biology that's getting
worked out going back to animal models
more about about how that might be
working in the retina in this inside the
eye uh but it's pretty compelling uh
concept and and so you know as a parent
uh you you may want to be you may want
to be telling your kid like okay yeah I
want you to read that book or you you
know if your kids playing on the phone
or something like that or the iPad or
something like that they're allowed that
time okay you can have that time but I
want you to spend some of the time that
you're doing that Outdoors are there any
thresholds for the amount of time that
uh one would suggest their child be
outdoors um to get that full spectrum
light that's a great question you know
we talk about cohort studies where we
just ask people what are they doing and
there seems to be you know a little bit
of what we would call a dose dependent
response maybe the more time Outdoors
might be better we don't know if there's
an upper limit like gosh if you go over
2 or three hours there's no additional
benefit talk about that in cohort
studies the real gold standard for
answering these kinds of questions are
randomized control trials and
specifically Placebo controlled or or a
control group that's not getting the
intervention that's our highest level of
evidence for clinical evidence for for
any of this kind of science uh when
we're talking about humans or
preclinical models in the laboratory and
the study that hasn't been done yet to
really answer that question is to
randomize kids to telling this group of
kids you just do your normal life tell
this group of kids we want you outside
an hour this group of kids we want you
outside two hours a day this group will
K three hours a day and see between the
groups is there a big difference like we
have pretty good evidence now from the
studies that have been done that the
difference between
zero and one or two hours is clearly
there is 5 minutes enough is 5 hours
better I don't think we know the answers
to those questions yet like what's the
right dose um but there's probably at
least some dose dependence to that and
it I can imagine it's a little bit hard
to tease apart the near far viewing from
the indoor outdoor because yes of course
a child could be outside on an iPad up
close but it's hard to imagine that at
some point they aren't seeing off into
the distance far viewing as it's called
and reverse is also true if you're
indoors unless you live in a very very
large home or you're staring off a
balcony far viewing is much harder to
achieve yeah yeah so it's and perhaps it
isn't important to isolate these
variables although I can see the
challenge in developing a really good
clinical trial randomized clinical trial
for this meanwhile I I you know I'm con
I'll go into the grave shouting you know
or saying rather and suggesting that
people get some morning sunlight in
their eyes to set their circadian rhythm
um but far viewing a few at least a few
minutes and ideally hours per day or a
mixture of near and far viewing by being
outdoors just seems like a good thing to
do regardless of age so are there any
data in older people not necessarily
elderly but older people so um people in
they from say 25 years of age into their
60s or 70s that getting outdoors and
getting this full spectrum light is
healthy for the eye in ways that are
separate from the known healthy effects
of doing that on circadian rhythm
setting yeah yeah the cadium Parts
pretty clear
the in most patient in most in most
people the near the development of
nearsightedness happens a lot until age
10 little more through age 20 little
more than that into the in you know in
through the 20s up to 30 tiny bit in the
30s up to 40 but usually by those later
ages your prescription might be changing
a quarter of a diopter that's the
measurement that we use when we you know
give you your glass glasses prescription
a quarter of a diopter half a diopter it
could get a half diopter more
nearsighted or less nearsighted you know
once you're aging into your 40s 50s and
Beyond so most of the action on
nearsightedness development is actually
really happening in the younger ages so
again the the premise of intervening in
an older person and I'll just include
you and me and older people for the sake
of this definition as much as I'm
reticent to do that in general um I
think the the the premise of in of a of
of sort of light modulation for
nearsightedness in older people is
probably probably not so strong I think
there are a lot of other benefits you've
talked a lot about circadian rhythm
there are so many health benefits to
exercise and you know if you're getting
Outdoors there's a good chance you're
going to be walking or bicycling you
know so so exercise value for the health
of our eyes and the rest of our body is
clearly there um but I don't know that
there's really a strong premise that
you're going to change your glasses
prescription you know in our 40s or 50s
or or Beyond I'd like to take a quick
break and acknowledge one of our
sponsors athletic greens athletic greens
now called ag1 is a vitamin mineral
probiotic drink that covers all of your
foundational nutritional needs I've been
taking athletic green since 2012 so I'm
delighted that they're sponsoring the
podcast the reason I started taking
athletic greens and the reason I still
take athletic greens once or usually
twice a day is that it gets to me the
probiotics that I need for gut health
our gut is very important it's populated
by gut microbiota that communicate with
the brain the immune system and
basically all the biological systems of
our body to strongly impact our
immediate and long-term health and those
probiotics and athletic greens are
optimal and vital for microbiotic health
in addition athletic greens contains a
number of adaptogens vitamins and
minerals that make sure that all of my
foundational nutritional needs are met
and it tastes great if you'd like to try
athletic green you can go to athletic
greens.com
huberman and they'll give you five free
travel packs that make it really easy to
mix up athletic greens while you're on
the road in the car on the plane Etc and
they'll give you a year supply of
vitamin D3 K2 again that's athletic
greens.com hubman to get the five free
travel packs and the year supply of
vitamin D3 K2 it's probably worth
touching on some of the dos and some of
the don'ts for I Health generally uh and
then I promise I'm going to get us back
to adult eye exams um because have a lot
of questions about
that I can imagine that it's probably
not a great idea to be exposed to
extremely bright light and this is why
people who weld wear eye Shields um but
of course most people are not welding um
what other sorts of environmental
conditions are detrimental to our vision
health across the lifespan um including
brightness of light uh we talked a
little bit about near far um obviously
we want to keep toxins and acids and
solvents and things out of the eye but
what do you see I'm hopefully not
commonly but what are some of the things
that you feel might not be discussed
enough in terms of Eye Health yeah you
know I think at all ages eye safety is
something that we don't talk about
enough um you know our eyes are delicate
the front surface of the eye the cornea
the Clear Window that lets the light go
into your eye that's a delicate very
sensitive structure it's thin maybe a
millimeter at the thickest half
millimeter in the center of our eye uh
the retina is it it's neural tissue this
is like really an outgrowth of the brain
this is very sensitive it's subject to
degenerative disease and injury our eyes
even if they just get hit can get very
inflamed our eyes can be more
inflammatory than a bruise on our skin
on our shoulder might be so I safety is
a big one and people who are um working
in certain
industries um you know anyone who's
doing any metal grinding people who are
even just gardening you know and if
you're if you're doing some significant
gardening and cutting and you could you
know Fleck a little bit of dirt and
there's a lot of there's a lot of for
example fungus that lives in the ground
natural stuff it's all very normal in
the in the Earth but you know our eyes
aren't really made to absorb that fungus
and and have have a piece of dirt kind
of stick in our eye like that and so
people are at risk I think for you know
for not and we see too much kind of
really unnecessary eye injury eye trauma
that if people wore either their glasses
because they happen to wear prescription
glasses or goggles or for more advanced
work you know safety goggles of course
um if you're sanding doing wood shop
projects anything like that sawing
including you know again in the garden
cutting things um you know I think I
think eye safety you know eye trauma is
a big one and you know we probably see
one or two um what we call open Globes a
week come into the Opera uh into the
emergency room and um you know those are
tough because you know again the eyes
delicate and it can do a lot of healing
but but not infinite right and so we
really you know that's that's one that I
think is really an untapped opportunity
is just a little more education
around um around eye protection
protecting against eye trauma what about
eye cleanliness there's some pretty
dramatic videos also um I've put some of
these on my Instagram handle these are
MRIs of people rubbing their eyeballs
and people really getting a sense of
first of all a restatement of what you
said getting a real sense of just how
much the eyes are in outgrowth of the
brain because of the op when you see
them with the optic nerves and all their
beauty and the eyeballs moving around as
someone rubs their eyes I have to
imagine that rubbing the eyeballs a
little bit as IM but I actually called
you I don't know if you remember when I
was a a junior Professor I woke up from
an app one day and I couldn't see had of
one eye I was freaking out so of course
I called you and I had pressure blinded
Myself by falling asleep on my hand or
something like that and you assured me
that my vision would come back and
indeed it did so you played dual role of
opthalmologist and psychiatrist thank
you and indeed I can see out of both
eyes um now um
but rubbing our eyes getting gunk our
eyes you know I think unless somebody
has lost their Vision
temporarily it's hard to imagine this is
like a big deal but when it happens it
is truly frightening we're so dependent
on Vision so um you know what are your
recommendations about rubbing or not
rubbing eyeballs about um hand washing
and cleanliness and also how do you wash
an eye properly do you use soap and
flush it with water or do you just flush
it with water or she not even do that
she use saline and realize these might
sound like low-level questions but these
are the things that people deal with on
on an all too frequent basis yeah you
know for most people most of the time
actually the eyes are a very good clean
environment and actually our tears are
are contain enzymes that help break down
bacteria and bacterial toxins and so for
most people regular eyew washing doesn't
have to be any part of their standard
routine in terms of the surface of the
eye the part of your eye the
conjunctiva uh over the whites of the
eyes underneath the eyelids anything
underneath the ey
it's pretty self-cleaning and actually
our tear production and blinking is very
good at keeping our eyes clean uh the
eyelids eyelashes can be another story
and especially as we age uh we can you
know like our skin is breaking down a
little differently than when we were
younger you can develop what we sort of
nickname scurf which is like kind of
little dead skin bits that accumulate
around the eyelashes a lot of people
develop what we call blefaritis which is
just just means inflammation of the
eyelashes yeah and for that doing some
eye scrubs is a good idea they actually
sell uh little pads that you can buy
kind of a little that you rip open and
you can use to kind of lightly clean the
eyelashes uh but you can also just use
like a No More Tears baby shampoo just
pump a little bit into the palm of your
hand once or twice a day uh let a little
uh dilute it with a little water under
the sink and either with your finger or
an edge of a washcloth just very light
rub the eyelashes what I like to do with
the eyes closed with the eyes closed and
and don't scrunch them closed too tight
because you're actually burying the
eyelashes when you do the the roots of
the eyelashes when you really scrunch
close so just gently close your eyes
just you know real gentle closure and
then just lightly scrub it shouldn't be
abrasive you're not trying to exfoliate
the eyelids or eyelashes in any way just
lightly rub with that kind of dilute No
More Tears baby shampoo and that can
really help people with eye Comfort if
you feel like you got something in your
eye your ideal eyewash is actually going
to be a sterile saline solution a
saltwater solution that you know they
sell little bottles over the- counter uh
eyewash Solutions like that a lot of
people wear contacts will have that kind
of eyewash solution just a sterile
saline eyewash just pure salt water
doesn't have to have any other chemicals
or preservatives in it you can of course
use not actual uh sea water salt water
not salt water thank you yeah not salt
water out of your salt pool not salt
water out of the ocean but like a saline
salt waterer that's available in a
sterile now you can also just use
artificial teardrops and some of those
come in nonpreserved some of those come
in preserved versions those are all also
completely safe in the to use in the eye
and there you can you know you can sort
of Spritz into your eye you know hold
the lid open and give it a little Spritz
if you feel like you got something in
your eye piece of dirt or A Lash that's
not coming out just to rinse it but but
having like a regular routine you know
you're not going to hurt anything with
the occasional eye rubbing we all do
these things just kind of as a you know
even a nervous habit or just
absentmindedly you know you might you
know scratch your arm or rub your eyes
or things like that that's fine you're
not going to hurt anything uh there are
conditions where people sort of develop
kind of a almost like a psychological
habit there are certain conditions where
people actually do too much eye rubbing
it can be Danger ous if you're in that
group but for the regular
run-of-the-mill every day occasional eye
rubbing fine if you certainly if you get
a lash in there and you're trying to rub
it and blink it and tear it out uh and
again in that situation you can use some
artificial tears wedding drops saline
drops uh those would be the way to do it
what an incredible tissue the way you
describe it you know the self-cleaning
and yet so delicate a piece of the brain
literally lining the back of each of our
eyes like like a pie crust I mean it's a
really remarkable um biological system
of course I don't have to tell you that
it's just it it never ceases to to amaze
me let's talk about eye exams in adults
so people are aware presumably that
they're optometrists and opthalmologists
I think it's important that we Define
their different and also overlapping
roles and for those that you know are
past High School age probably not
getting eye exams unless they're sensing
a problem um perhaps not even with
blurry vision or or difficulty seeing at
a distance but sometimes just what feels
like fatigue of the eyes or a hard time
maintaining alignment of the eyes um so
how often do you recommend people get
eye exams what is a true regular eye
exam and is it important that people go
to an opthalmologist or will an
optometrist suffice typically
optometrists are a little bit easier for
most people to access because there's
usually one someplace near an eyeglass
store
um so what are their roles how often
should we get our eyes checked yeah um
optometrist and opthalmologists do have
very overlapping roles in being ey care
providers uh there are something over 40
or 50,000 optometrists in the United
States there's somewhere around 20,000
opthamologists in the United States
optometrists get an optometry degree
they often have OD after their name
opthalmologists usually went you know
went to medical school they either have
an MD after their name or they kind of a
do version of a medical degree and uh
and then optometrists will have done
additional clinical training in that
area in their area uh of ey care
provision opthalmologist MD doctor
opthalmologist uh Eye Care providers in
addition to that training will have done
surgical training in
Opthalmology um now uh there's a lot of
overlap and um in both
scenarios uh you can be getting your
sort of General exam taken care of maybe
a screening exam I think that there's
been a traditional differentiation
between optometrist and opthalmologists
with optometrist providing a little more
of the primary care eye
screening maybe managing early disease
common diseases as well uh with more
advanced disease often sort of upgrading
to perhaps specialist opthalmologists in
those areas but that distinction has
been uh declining over time it's still
true that in I think most if not all
states only the MD opthalmologists uh
surgeons can do eye surgeries but um
both both groups of eye care providers
can diagnose both can
prescribe uh appropriate eye drop
treatments including prescription ey
drop treatments for for many of our
diseases uh eye diseases
and um and in some states optometrists
have successfully lobbied for uh sort of
expanded rights of providing Air Care
Eye Care and again um access to care for
you know the regular person wherever
they may live is is the most important
element and so being able to access ey
care whether it's with an optometrist in
your community or an opthalmologist that
may be in your community or maybe at a
distance I think that's that's the the
really important thing is to access care
now kind of like we were talking about
with kids uh if you're in your teens 20s
maybe even 30s and not having any
problem you've got no complaints you can
see it distance you can see it
near um you know so you can read without
glasses you can drive without
glasses um you're not having any eye
pains you know pains around the eyes you
know redness of the eyes you may never
present to an eye care provider uh
through the first four Decades of life
and almost all the time it's going to be
okay right if you're not symptomatic the
chance you've got some terrible lurking
disease in there is
low but we do wish that we had a little
more screening going on because there
are some diseases gloma for example my
specialty the two main risk factors for
glaucoma are increasing ing age and it
usually presents you know in most cases
actually after age 40 but also
increasing eye pressure and if your eye
pressure is too high you can't feel that
that won't feel funny to you if it sort
of slowly is crept up over the years and
so from a screening perspective it is
good to get some kind of screening exam
could be at a public health fair could
be that you go into the local
optometrist just say hey I've never been
checked I'd like to be checked once make
sure everything's good could you ask for
sorry to interrupt but could somebody
say I'd like my pressures checked as I
recall at the optometrist they're going
to do a puff test so they're going to
blast some air um get a sense of how how
rigid or or um soft again using a
non-clinical non-technical language here
the eyeball happens to be um now right
now by the way I'm sure there are um
several hundreds of thousands of people
who are with eyes closed touching the
sides of their eyeballs and I'm only
half joking please don't do this folks
um given the conversation we just had
about eye cleanliness and eye rubbing
but my understanding is is that the old
F truly old-fashioned eye pressure exam
was you would close your eyes and the
opthalmologist would gently press to see
whether or not your eyes were more rigid
than last time yeah is that right yeah
that's called botman and you can kind of
you can you can kind of just take one
second if you're listening and press on
your eyes just very lightly and you
there's a little give of course the
eyelids part of that give but but it's
not it's not like rock hard and if we
press and it feels under the eyelid like
gosh something under there is Rock card
then we know something is wrong that is
way too high pressure if it's rock hard
but I'll tell you our ability to
differentiate the fine points of eye
pressure other than Rock Hard or not
rock hard is pretty limited so yeah the
optometrist office or the opthalmologist
office as part of a comprehensive
screening exam they'll check the eye
pressure they'll look at the surface of
your eyes make sure everything's looking
healthy there including the eyelids and
lashes and the look inside the eye and
be able to scre green for these diseases
that way too in addition to checking if
you're complaining of any you know
blurriness at distance or at near now
after age 40 or so a lot of people will
present to an eye care provider because
we all get what's called presbyopia and
presbyopia just translates to
disease vision of the Aged so you know
myopia is our word for nearsighted
hyperopia is farsighted actually emat
means normal sided so I can see at
distance without any glasses I'm emat
Tropic but then we all get presbyopia
and as we age the lens inside our eye
that's helping focus light onto our
retina gets stiffer such that our eye
muscles are no longer able to relax and
reshape that lens and we're not as good
as we age at moving our Focus from
distance Vision distance Vision by the
way is basically anything 3T or further
away You're basically viewing light rays
coming from Infinity at once you're past
three feet so three feet or further
being able to focus that into 14 in or
12 Ines which might be a normal
comfortable reading space for
you we lose that ability to flex our
lens relax our lens uh refocus our lens
from distance to near and most people
around age 40 could be a couple years
years before could be five or 10 years
later that you notice it but sort of
around that time you start needing
reading glasses you need a little extra
even if you can see fine at distance and
don't need prescription glasses for
distance you need a booster you need
reading glasses for near I don't know if
you're experiencing this yet yeah I'm
really intrigued by this but maybe you
could clarify when you say reading
glasses do you mean just a magnifier
because I use a you know a 0.5 or a 75
magnifier for reading but I try and rely
on them as little as possible and I want
to get to this about using glasses as a
crutch and the problems with that um I
have a story about that too I seem you
know it's no coincidence I decide to
work on Vision I mean after all um had a
bunch of vision issues that fortunately
are corrected but you know I I do
experience for instance when I wake up
in the morning if I look at my phone
which by the way folks I try and get
outside and see sunlight first before
ever looking at the phone but I'll
notice when I first look at my phone in
the morning that I can see it very
clearly through my right eye but that if
I cover my right eye my left eye is
extremely blurry to the point where I'm
like I'm calling Jeff you know I'm I'm
afraid but then over the course of maybe
10 15 minutes it resolves and I don't
think it's because something's in my eye
I don't think it's pressure of having
slept on that side I don't think it's a
lubrication of the eye issue um but the
two eyes seem to come into Focus so to
speak um at different rates early in the
day and if I pop my readers on I can see
right away so I will use readers late in
the day often um if I want to read at
night or something that sort it just it
feels so much more relaxing I feel like
like I can finally relax whereas
otherwise I realize that I'm straining
in order to see does is there any um
clinical clinical data in what I just
described yeah I you know Andy I'll tell
you my story that's like that and um we
were living down in San Diego when you
and I were both professors at UC San
Diego and uh we had moved into a house
and I found a pair of glasses a pair of
reading glasses uh in a closet and you
know we asked around you know did any of
the grandparents uh leave some glasses
behind nobody seemed to know who they
were so we we finally just decided like
well I guess the people who moved out of
the house just left a pair of glasses
you know in this in the back of this
closet and then I tried the glasses on
and I looked at my phone up close
and was just like oh my God wait a
second I didn't realize how blurry my
near Vision was and this is back I was
about 40 42 something like that so so I
didn't even realize until I put on the
readers and these were you know 1.25
magnifiers you know so also mild mild
ones and I'll tell
you I got addicted because who doesn't
like good Vision right right right I
mean oh my God now I can make the type
smaller on my phone I can you know was
wonderful and you can relax a bit I mean
the musculature that's responsible for
for moving the lens and focusing the eye
and then all this extraocular
musculature I we forget I mean I'm
definitely going crows feet um around my
eyes uh probably because I you know
squint or something but you know just
the ability to relax one's face it's
just feels like you know more more
energy I feel like can be devoted to
what we're actually looking at not
making light of this yeah well pretty
soon I just kept that one pair of
glasses with me all the time and I would
just keep them in a pocket and whip them
out whenever I was you know working at
near using my phone at a little greater
distance like a typical computer
distance I could still see the computer
fine so it really started for like kind
of that close-up phone it was it was I
could get into here but not all the way
into here and um yeah and then pretty
soon I was just totally addicted and so
you know then I had to go buy 10 pairs
and leave them one by the bedside table
you know one in the car one in the
computer bag one on every desk I work at
yeah because I'd leave them anywhere and
forget them and that way just yeah
exactly you know yeah so um yeah
so whether using the
readers accelerates the
progression of dependence on the readers
is still
uh not you know that's still up for
debate you know some studies say maybe
yes some studies say maybe no but
certainly
psychologically we get addicted to good
easy vision and if you don't have to
squint and if you're not straining your
muscles and all of a sudden the the text
on your phone looks crisper again uh boy
that's addictive you're you're going to
like good vision and so it feels like
you're getting dependent and how much of
that is change in the eye muscles and
how much of that is just the pschology
of wanting to have good Vision I think
probably the jury's a little bit out on
that point but point being your either
either way your dependence will grow and
as you continue to age 40s 50s up until
about 60
65 the ability to shape that lens gets
weaker and weaker and weaker and so you
need to move from the 05s to the 1.0s to
the 1.5s and the coke bottle to the coke
botle thankfully you eventually max out
at about plus 2.5 or plus three because
that's the amount of extra refractive
power that you need in magnifiers to
take the equivalent of your Infinity
viewing and bring it up to 14 in to read
it near basically you need a plus three
and then you don't need
any lens ey muscle action whatsoever so
you kind of max out around 2.5S or three
so because most people will hit this
somewhere in their 40s this sort of like
gosh I'm having trouble on the phone I
think most people actually use that
that's like kind of the first time for a
lot of people they're like well I guess
I should go to the eye office right see
the optometrist or maybe opthalmologist
and when they go in they should be
getting the standard in either of those
offices will be to give you a full
screening exam including maybe it's the
puff test or a blue light test or a
little pen that that can check your eye
pressure and having a look inside and
seeing if you're retin and optic nerve
look healthy it's kind of screening for
all the main diseases and so and they'll
tell you at that point hey you look
great if you feel like your glasses
aren't doing it for you in a year or
three years come back or they might say
hey I've detected something I'm worried
about you and they'll set up a routine
for your ongoing Eye
Care assuming that somebody doesn't have
um you know some form of amopa or the
need for some really robust corrective
lenses and they are already using
readers let's say a plus one or so you
know plus one plus or minus point5
reader would you recommend based on my
experience and based on your experience
that people strive to avoid using them
for as long as they can because in some
sense if that's the
recommendation then the recommendation
is that people kind of deal with the
fact that they're seeing a little less
well or a lot less well than they
possibly could so I'm assuming that
people can still drive well people can
still read but it involves a little bit
more effort in other words are we
weakening Our Eyes by using these these
readers I I realize you said that the
data are a little bit mixed but as long
as one can perform their required daily
activities would we be better off
delaying the use of
readers there's two important answers to
that question one is regarding the lens
and the eye muscles that control the
lens and it's entirely plausible that's
what I was saying kind of the data is
mixed on but it's plausible that if we
would just exercise like work a little
harder kind of not use as strong a
reader as we want or not use that reader
as often as we might really enjoy uh are
we exercising those muscles and kind of
exercising the ability to to to stretch
versus relax the lens and kind of slow
the progression from the 1.0 reader to
the 1.25 reader to the 1.5 reader Etc
right and so that that's why I saying
the data is mixed but there's a good
premise that maybe if you're exercising
but let me give you the on on the other
hand it's probably ideal to give your
retina and your brain the sharpest
visual signals you can so why hamstring
your retina and your brain and your
vision and your enjoyment and ability to
read or do near work by constantly
undercutting the the the reading glasses
or leaving them out or you're not
helping the whole back part of your
maybe you're maybe you're helping the
lens but you're definitely not helping
your retina and brain by feeding it
blurry information all of that time so I
actually think just give in use the
readers have your enjoy your Best Vision
all the time and if that means wearing
glasses and by the way if that means
that you're going to have minus two
glasses for vision and you'll eventually
need minus 250s for distance Vision or
if you're going to need readers 1.5
readers now and in a few years 2.0
readers okay so you'll get the next
reader it's it's actually not a big deal
you can you can you know you're not
you're not hurting you're probably
helping and in the meantime it's an
enormous enjoyment to actually have good
Vision all the time right so so I
actually counsel
people just wear the glasses that work
best for you you know you're only
minimally changing how your prescription
is going to change over time very
minimally so just enjoy your Best Vision
even if it's using readers for close or
or prescription glasses for far
appreciate that recommendation I do
enjoy you using the readers at night it
really helps for all the reasons I
mentioned
before I've noticed that driving at
night presents an enormous strain on my
visual system and I've noticed this for
a number of years are there any um I
know there's something called stationary
night blindness I don't think I'm
stationary night blind um I think the
mutation for stationary night blindness
was identified in the Kusa horse or
something like that these were horses
that you could walk up to very easily
and they wouldn't even you until you're
right there someone's going to correct
me on this it's the internet but I think
that the mutation was identified um Etc
but I don't think I'm stationary night
blind but I do find that driving at
night I get very
fatigued and then I'll sometimes even
wear my plus one readers when I drive at
night which removes the fatigue even
though I'm looking more or less at a
distance are there some conditions that
make it hard for people to see at night
for which they would want corrective
lenses um and what what sorts of biology
underlies that assuming that somebody is
not stationary night blind or a Kusa I
think is the name of the breed horse
yeah that's a great question you know we
for the for the optical defects in our
eyes most or many of which can be
corrected with just having the right
prescription lenses we can get away with
it without using those Corrections in
brighter light and so during the daytime
um you know uh you could be slightly
blurry you know if I have a real bright
light uh and a good high contrast book
you know with black letters on the white
page I can get away with reading that
without my readers unlike if if I'm in
dim light then I feel and that might be
kind of what you're describing if you're
reading at night you actually prefer to
use the readers a little more even at
night because we can make up for a lot
of that blur if we just have bright
enough signal and contrast coming into
our eyes makes sense yeah so when you're
driving at night and noticing this this
might be revealing a little bit of a
need for glasses now I'm not suggesting
this is the answer but far more common
than having congenital stationary night
blindness would be being what's called a
latent hyperope okay now we talked about
already how the lens inside our eye goes
from focusing at distance to then we
squeeze the muscles the lens actually
rounds up and allows us to focus it near
some people's Optical system of their
eye is actually wired uh or designed or
sort of set up in length not for regular
distance which would be anywhere from
about 3 feet to
Infinity but it's actually designed it's
actually tuned for being beyond Infinity
which doesn't make any actual sense when
you talk about it but just the Optics of
the eye at their best Focus are actually
focusing the light behind the retina and
and if you're doing that when you're
younger you're actually using some of
your focusing power to to to use those
muscles strain those muscles relax that
lens round up that lens and have your
vision Focus From Beyond Infinity to
normal distance like distance vision and
so if you're a late and hyperope you are
constantly using those muscles and again
if you're tired it's the end of the day
your muscles are feeling a little
fatigued uh your latent hyperopia or by
the way if you've had a drinker too uh
alcohol can do this too your latent
hyperopia can kind of kick in especially
as we're aged and we're not as good at
refocusing that lens anyway and now all
of a sudden your vision is kind of
reverting to its natural state which is
slightly out of focus at distance
because it's actually focused Beyond
infin
if you will and so all of a sudden you
put on that plus one just for a little
extra booster kick and you're like oh
yeah yeah distance vision is clean and
easy now so I'll have to bring you into
the clinic to really be sure but you
could be exhibiting a little bit of that
kind of lat and hyperopia I definitely
want the ey exam and I want it from you
and I've been called a lot of things in
life um and we can now let add perhaps
latent hyper
op uh to that I I'd like to take a quick
break and thank our sponsor insid
tracker insid tracker is a personalized
nutrition platform that analyzes data
from your blood and DNA to help you
better understand your body and help you
reach your health goals I've long been a
believer in getting regular blood work
done for the simple reason that many of
the factors that impact your immediate
and long-term Health can only be
assessed with a quality blood test the
problem with a lot of blood and DNA
tests out there however is that they'll
give you information about certain lipid
markers or hormone markers but no
information about what to do with all of
that data inside tracker makes it very
easy to look at your levels of hormones
metabolic factors lipids Etc and then to
assess what sorts of Behavioral
nutritional supplementation or perhaps
other interventions you might want to
use to bring those numbers into the
ranges that are appropriate and indeed
optimal for you if you'd like to try
insid tracker you can visit insid
tracker.com huberman and get 20% off any
of insid trackers plans that's
insidetracker tocom huberman to get 20%
off another piece here and again this
discussion is not designed to be an eye
exam for me but um I have yet another
experience that I think illustrates the
key importance of both critical period
plasticity and the questions about
whether or not to rely on corrective
lenses and that is uh from the time I
was pretty young I could make my sister
laugh by deviating one eye inward so not
crossing my eyes but moving one eye
Inward and then what happened was when I
was in college and studying a lot a lot
and getting very fatigued I noticed that
this I started just kind of drift in a
little bit so I went to the campus
Health Center and they gave me a
prescription for a prism lens which of
course redirects the image but then I
noticed that this eyeball moving Inward
and I guess for those of you watching on
uh on YouTube and not just listening um
I can do this um by just moving one eye
in all right as I can move this eye in
yeah it's fairly pronounced it started
to really drift in at at a relaxation
State and I started seeing double again
so I thought these prism this one prism
lens lens is a crutch of the sort that I
really don't want crushed the glasses
broke them and and never went back to
them um I have voluntary control over it
but that's one example where the
corrective lens can actually create a
pretty significant shift in eye position
if one relies on it so this gets back to
this issue of um when should people
Force themselves to work with their
natural vision maybe do some more far
viewing um as a and certainly get
outside and get sunlight into the
sunlight full spectrum light as opposed
to relying on corrective lenses yeah and
and you've raised a very important
distinction here and that's the
distinction between the muscles that are
inside our eye that we use to relax and
refocus the lens and the muscles that
are on the outside of the eyeball of
course inside our orbit but on the
outside of the eyeball that turn the
eyes and if everything's working right
keeps our eyes really yolked straight
and we talk talked about earlier uh this
possibility that you may have been
having a little bit of intermittent
esotropia or intermittent turning in of
the eyes that then culminated on that
day day at the pool when you really
noticed it um and your ongoing ability
to actually turn one eye in could be
related to that I I remember as a kid
standing in front of the mirror and I I
couldn't get my eyes to cross even
though friends could do it and you know
so you know I I I I was in the losing
group on that on that end of the SP
became an opthalmologist and then I
became an opthalmologist which and I
must say it is very reassuring that you
have excellent Vision you know I always
worry when I go to a new dentist and
then I look up at them in one moment and
if they're not wearing a mask that their
teeth are not you know pristine I think
well what am I doing here so you know an
opthalmologist with excellent Vision G
brings me uh great comfort the cobbler's
children should have shoes right exactly
um but yeah so so when to correct when
not to correct with lenses and I realize
here we haven't talked at all about
contacts we've been talking about
eyeglasses yeah let's come to context in
a sec if you want but yeah let let let
me return to your question the
difference between providing corrective
lenses that allow you to focus for near
or distance uh in your glasses so that
you can go easy on the inside the eye
eye muscle having to work so hard a lot
of people get eye strain and sort of uh
headaches even from that from not having
an adequate correction that they're
wearing that's different actually ESP
especially when we're children or again
into that maybe even into the teens and
even young adult years from the eye
muscles on the outside of the eyes which
are supposed to be yoking our eyes
straight and so that you have them both
looking at the same point in space and
and there it's actually quite a common
treatment to try to undercorrect and ask
people to exercise and not just give a
prism that says hey if your eyes in
sometime we'll use a prism so the light
sort of looks right to you but rather
undercorrect that and sort of really
force you to exercise trying to yoke
your two eyes straight together and so
that's that's in contrast and there
actually I I think many optometrists who
often specialize in in what are the
right glasses to give in a situation
like that uh wherever possible
especially during uh development as our
bodies are developing as we're sort of
growing in our younger years uh take the
approach of intentionally trying to
undercorrect not use a prism or not use
a full prism correction uh and um to to
really help uh sometimes it's also like
an accommodative reflex that your eyes
are just you're spending so much time
reading it near when you read it near
your eyes actually naturally turn in a
little bit to focus uh at that near so
that they can be looking at the same
word on the page uh and that can also if
you've got kind of too much muscle drive
you can overshoot that and so sometimes
just using not a prism but like a little
bit of a plus lens in kids just so they
don't have to work quite so hard to turn
their eyes in and sort of EX ovx
exercise those muscles these are all
great examples where going to an iare
provider often for these kinds of issues
an optometrist is the right first place
to start you'd like to say that every
optometrist and every opthalmologist is
always going to give the exact right
thing for for each kid or young adult or
older adult to do and and we wish all
medical care providers were were always
right on Target and a lot of times it's
a perfect science but a lot of times
it's an imperfect science and so it
could be that at least with you know
we're now 20 25 30 years later but like
it could be that today that 20 year-old
version of yourself would have been
given a different uh approach to having
one eye intermittently occasionally
turning in like that is there any real
value to um near exercises you know
so-called pencil push-ups or uh smooth
Pursuit tracking I've talked a little
bit about it before on the podcast but
that was you know some time ago so what
are your thoughts on on that is there
any value whatsoever I mean they they
require a little bit of work just like
going to the gym but you know you know
25 reps a day of near far um especially
as one is transitioning from age 30 to
age 50 um is it worthwhile yeah is it
harmful in any way definitely not
harmful and again uh you know would it
slow down or sort of um slow down your
progression to Presby opio or needing
those reading glasses uh could be some
people also develop um sort of uh you
know a real failure to properly turn
their eyes in and so they actually would
benefit if you've been diagnosed with
that inability you're having double
vision at near but not at
distance um so that kind of convergence
insufficiency for example uh that then
pencil push-ups often get prescribed as
a way to try to exercise those skills in
you know uh in your eye muscles um I
should interrupt here and just tell
people for those of you that are
listening not watching the pencil
push-up we can put a a link to it uh in
the show note captions but it's
essentially taking a pen or pencil
looking at it at um at Arms distance and
then uh slowly moving it toward your
nose and U deliberately working hard and
it is a bit of effort to continue to
focus on it at a close distance at some
point it will become blurry because I
can't cross my eyes any further um
unless I become a cyclops and then
moving it back out again and doing that
for you know 10 to 25 repetitions maybe
once or twice a day a few times a week
um that's what those are pencil push-ups
yeah yeah so um you're certainly not
going to hurt anything there are other
situations where those really do get
prescribed and there's definitely some
good clinical trial data suggesting that
they can actually help for example
recovery from concussion a l a lot of
people actually one of the really
telling ways to diagnose concussion and
this can be concussion from sports or a
fall or you know any any source of
concussion uh your smooth Pursuit which
is the ability let's say I've got a DOT
moving around in a circle on a screen
and I'm following that dot with my eyes
my eyes should be able to very smoothly
follow that circle around the lit up
hockey puck on one watching a hockey
game is that like that you're a hockey
fan right like that you know just
following a ball you know following any
movement with smooth Pursuits of your
eyes and after concussion that actually
those systems in our brain the sort of
reflexive ability to properly follow
that use that visual input to tell your
ey muscles exactly where to move gets
disrupted and so all of a sudden your
smooth Pursuit starts to look choppy
it's not so smooth anymore and it's
actually a way to diagnose and follow
recovery from concussion and part of the
visual rehab sort of neuro rehab one of
the approaches being used and further
studied still in recovery from
concussion is actually doing those kinds
of exercises like pencil push-ups or
basically what you've described as
focusing from far away to focusing near
and doing that back and forth and using
that to sort of like help
regain uh the tighter control of our eye
movements and that eye brain connection
so if traumatic brain injury causes
deficits in smooth Pursuit eye movements
and some of the recovery protocols for
traumatic brain injury are to have
people do smooth Pursuit protocols and
pencil push-ups are these also the sorts
of things that anyone can just do I mean
whenever possible we like to share tools
for various aspects of Health on this
podcast but of course we don't want
people cowboying this stuff in a way
that could be detrimental to their to
their Vision so is it okay to get on
YouTube and find a smooth suit um uh
Tool uh we can put a link to these there
there are several of them um and people
spend a few minutes doing this yeah
you're definitely not going to hurt
anything so totally fine to do it and
some people may notice you know like
they feel a little more visually active
if they do these kinds of
exercises um I think most people would
do them and not notice something in
their daily life we actually have um
made so much progress you know in
research in thinking about how do we
take the diseased or dysfunctioning or
aging eye and get it back to healthy and
normal but there's a whole other area of
science that's we're really just barely
touching we've actually we've actually
just opened a vision performance center
to really get at not just how do we
rehab the sick eye back to to health but
what's the difference between
functioning normally and functioning
above normally for example athletes when
they get studied for visual Vision
characteristics they have faster visual
reflexes higher visual
Acuity uh how much of that was you know
genetic how much of that is trained we
don't really understand could we train
all of us with you know normal vision to
get up to Supra normal vision these are
like great important questions that are
really relevant to you know every
regular person of course you know people
doing Esports in The Gaming Community
and athletes this part of what we're
studying in the vision performance
center but these are really really big
opportunities to try to understand how
do we move people from normal vision to
supernormal vision and there's evidence
that you can do it so here here's a
great example some athletes
train using these special goggles that
actually use electrical signals in the
glasses part of the goggles to actually
black out your vision 130th of every
second 2 30ths of every second 3 30ths
of Every second now imagine you and I
are passing a basketball back and forth
except you're wearing goggles and all of
a sudden you're only getting 90% of the
data of where's that basketball on its
way to my hands now you're only getting
80% now you're only getting 70% of that
visual information and you are
practicing right you are getting good at
catching a basketball when you only have
a fraction of the visual information and
now I put you back on the basketball
court without the goggles you might be
really good at passing that basketball
around and catching that basketball
right and so the idea that we could
train and understand the biology of
training to get the eyes from normal to
Super normal performance I think it's an
amazing area and one that we've really
just started to dig into that's
fantastic so this is a a new program at
Stanford through the department of
Opthalmology is it linked up at all with
the WOAI performance Institute yeah
actually there's been a lot of focus
over the years I think in human
performance and there's actually a new
human performance uh Alliance and Center
we've we've we've long had really run
through the department of Orthopedics a
human perform laboratory that's really
you know much more about joints and
muscles and strength and conditioning
and stretching uh to layer onto that now
a real understanding of how vision is
operating you know it's interesting
let's go back to the example of
concussion you know we've got I don't
know about 800 Varsity student athletes
in all the different sports at Stanford
and you might have a student athlete
come in and say you know something
doesn't feel right I got a little hit on
the head head I feel like my vision is a
little bit messed up maybe I've got a
mild concussion you could imagine doing
some of these tests on some of these
performance athletes for example and
saying well gosh you you look normal but
actually they used to be operating at a
supern normal rate and this is a
noticeable decrement for them and so
just starting to study and understand
what's the difference between normal and
supernormal how do we go back and forth
between those two how do we measure that
difference and maybe ultimately how do
we train into that difference I think
it's going to be exciting and not just
for athletes you know for for regular
people you know you talk about driving
at night is there a solution where we
could train our eyes to be better at
driving at night and I don't know maybe
reduce the number of accidents that
happen out in the world so well
certainly there's um physical training
protocols which are redefining what a
60-year-old or a
70-year-old could look like and feel
like and be able to perform like why not
do the same for vision um so I don't
think there's anything um Supernatural
or greedy about doing it I think that's
the excitement of biology and
neuroplasticity that you can extend it
forward as opposed to just trying to
wire up correctly during development
this is a perfect time for me to ask you
a question that I'd love a clear answer
on if it's possible it's not always
possible which is could you define 2020
vision and a few of the variants so so
that any person could understand it so
we think of 2020 as perfect vision what
does that mean what would degraded
Vision look
like whatever those numbers are and then
what would above normal super normal
vision look like and is it true that
fighter pilots have supranormal Vision
yeah that's another population like like
like many athletes of of people who may
have sort of better than normal vision
2020 you know we Define almost
everything we do based on you know kind
of a average not sick human being adult
whatever it is right and so 2020 Vision
means that you can read the smallest
letters at 20 feet away that the average
healthy person can
read at 20 feet away so you can read at
20 what they can read at 20 okay now if
you have worse than 2020 Vision maybe
you have 2025 Vision 2040 Vision maybe
you have 2200 Vision which on the ey
chart at the office is like the Big E at
the very top is 2200 Vision that means
you can read at 20 feet what a normal
person could read at 200 feet right so
you've got pretty limited lower Vision
we can measure down to like 2400 28 800
at that point we're getting into like
gosh can you count how many fingers I'm
holding up you know that kind of thing
and then ultimately hand motion can you
even tell if my hand is moving in this
side of your vision or this side of your
vision and then ultimately after that
light perception can you tell if the
room lights are on or off right and
that's kind of the edge of of being
actually fully blind we call Legal
blindness in the United States typically
2200 or worse and is it true that there
are people who are legally blind that
are out there driving as we're having
this conversation I I have to imagine
that that is unfortunately the case but
it shouldn't be because those people
obviously are really severely impaired
and and and and that's obviously quite
dangerous so so so that's 2020 now it
gets worse 2040 2080 20000 can it get
better yeah it turns out that people can
be sort of on the other end of that
curve and so we could have athletes and
fighter pilots or people who have had
lasic surgery who are
2015 2010 if you're 2010 that means you
can see at 20 feet what the average
person needs to be only 10 feet away to
see right and so you've got better than
normal vision and people do get to that
through a variety of ways and so it is
possible to have better than 2020
Vision does the degree of visual Acuity
because that's really what we're talking
about here
differ dramatically between the two
odd and most healthy people no um you
know remember we talked about you're
born with something like 2200 Vision
takes you a couple of years and it could
be a little bit asymmetric 2200 Vision
yeah that reminds me um I've seen images
of what babies can see you know parents
love looking at their child and thinking
that their child is looking right back
at them and indeed often the child is
looking right back at them and your face
to your child sorry to break this to you
folks is incredibly blurry even at that
close distance for probably the first 6
to eight months even before you come
into sharp relief they're not seeing the
fine details of your face yeah so smile
big that's right smile big keep those
eyebrows dark right and keep cooing at
them because they can hear pretty well
early yeah the Optics of newborn babies
are just dreadfully bad but they need
visual stimulation now other species na
you know Hawks uh Raptors owls that hunt
uh they can naturally have 2010 28
Vision right so much better vision and
that's just their normal vision as best
as has been measured so so there's
definitely the potential for us to have
better than 2020 Vision now all of this
we call Visual Acuity and just to be
clear for everyone that's the vision in
the very center of your vision like when
you're reading or looking that's the
very center of your vision our vision is
actually actually described variably as
a hill of vision the peak is in the
center that's let's say 2020 in most
people right but it's it's normal to
have that slope off and our visual
Acuity your ability to read the eye
chart on the edges of your vision if you
can read the Big E that's pretty normal
like you would be 2200 out on the edges
of your vision and we would feel like
yep that's pretty normal um so so our
highest Acuity Visions in the center and
that's a big part of why we spent a lot
of time using those eye muscles to look
around right we got to we got to get a
little bit of a high Acuity view of
what's around us uh fill in fill in the
gaps of what our what our brain is is
interpreting our peripheral world to
look like it's almost like we have two
visual systems we have a high Acuity
High pixel density camera in the middle
and then surrounding that is a pretty
low resolution but very fast detector
camera yes yeah yeah you mentioned lasic
but I want to make sure that before we
talk about lasic that we talk a little
bit about contact lenses is there any
detriment to having a piece of glass or
a piece of plastic on the front of your
eye all the time and the reason I ask is
not because I think we should live
necessarily exactly like our ancestors
but it's a pretty bizarre adaptation to
put a lens directly onto the front of
the eye you have to imagine that the
cells and tissues there are accustomed
to getting a certain amount of oxygen
they're accustomed to getting a certain
amount of interaction with the
environment and and you also now adding
another surface the way that the tears
are going to interact with the um you
know with the corny of the eye are
probably changed and who knows maybe it
doesn't make any negative difference at
all but you know putting a contact lens
on the front of the eye is you know
about as close to putting a device on
your brain as I can think of except for
maybe the clear uh implant yeah
yeah that's a great question now first
of all um I want to distinguish uh there
are few really medical uses for
different kinds of contact lenses like
scleral contact lenses for people have
certain diseases there are other kinds
but I think what we really want to talk
about right now is just kind of the
run-ofthe-mill I want to get my
prescription taken care of but instead
of wearing glasses I'm going to wear
contacts contacts even the newest
generation contacts yes they sort of uh
change the tiar Dynamics on the surface
of your ey
they um uh they decrease the oxygen you
know diffusion that's just sort of out
in the air onto the surface of our eye
onto the cells that are on the surface
of our eye but most of us especially as
we're younger have enough tier film
Reserve enough oxygen Reserve that we
can easily tolerate these polymer gel
soft contact lenses and and wear them
happily the advantage of contact lenses
over glasses purely from the perspective
of correcting your vision is that
there's different elements of of of of
the shape of your eye that need to be
corrected if you need corrective lenses
and so for example if your the
basketball shape of your eye is a little
too steep or a little too shallow that's
what the standard glasses correct uh you
may have been told that you have
something called a stigmatism that's
where instead of having a basketball
shaped eye you have a slightly
football-shaped eye it's not round in
the same dimensions on both axes and
again glasses can correct that but then
there's higher order aberration in our
corneas in the clear window in the front
of our eyes or or to some degree in the
lens inside the eye that are that are
focusing the light that the glasses
prescription can't correct but if you
have nice smooth contact lens on the
front it can correct so a lot of people
who wear glasses and contacts will
report that they have a much higher
quality of vision with their contact
lens correction than with their glasses
correction and again in service of
enjoying the best Vision that you can
enjoy in your daily life that's an
upside to seeing if contact could work
for you now there's another element
though and that's like gosh is there a
risk of contact lenses
and especially as we
age um we have less tear film Reserve so
contacts may become less tolerable as we
age and the other thing is being really
good about the cleaning because you know
the contacts can trap bacteria or fungus
and if you get a corial infection from a
contact lens it actually can be quite
devastating to your cornea even if you
successfully treat the infection you can
be left with some corneal scarring
thankfully this happens very rarely but
when it does happen it can be quite
difficult on you know on the person
thereafter to sort of suffer through
having maybe a scar from that infection
on the surface of their cornea that they
that leads to some blurring vision for
example so we always recommend that if
you're going to wear contacts that you
be really attentive to whether you're
tolerating them well and then also to be
really attentive to the recommended use
and cleaning of the contact lenses I
actually recommend that even though
they're a little more expensive to
afford that people should almost always
be just using the daily contact lenses
that they don't have to clean or use for
uh you know two weeks or four- week
period so these are disposable contact
lens disposable and I hate to think of
you know I don't know filling our oceans
or what have you with more more more
polymer plastic but at least the contact
lenses are small and it's much safer for
your eye to use a daily disposable than
to use a two we or a 4 we and be
responsible for the cleaning the other
thing to be really responsible about is
sleeping in them overnight because
overnight when your eyelids are closed
of course now you're getting even less
oxygen to the surface of your eye and
actually most bacteria especially many
of the Infectious bacteria to our bodies
and to the surface of our eye are
actually bacteria that don't really like
oxygen and so we've got a low risk of
getting bacterial infections on the
surface of our eye but if we use
contacts too much don't clean them or
sleep in them overnight when our eyelids
are closed and now there's even less
oxygen kind of helping keep the surface
more more clean if you will uh that
increases the risk a lot so being really
good with the recommended use and
cleaning of the contacts is critical
considering daily use contacts you don't
have to and look most contacts are going
to be the two we or four-week kind where
you put them in the cleaning solution
overnight each time give them a good
rinse and put them back in the next say
and again most people
99.99 some perent of people are going to
do just fine with that follow the
instructions and never get into trouble
as we age they're going to become less
tolerable people are going to say I used
to wear my contacts for 12 hours now my
eyes feel really dry after six or eight
or 10 hours maybe some years after that
they say gosh I could barely use it for
four hours I only use them when I go out
on a Saturday night uh and and that's
okay you can you can you can back off as
you need to back off but in the meantime
if it helps you especially in the
younger decades if it helps you really
enjoy uh Your Best Vision
great what about UV protection in
eyeglass lenses Andor
contacts um I've dealt with many
questions about blue light I am not
somebody who believes that all blue
light is terrible I think it's important
to avoid Bright Lights of any wavelength
late at night if you want your melatonin
produ to be normal and you want to sleep
well doesn't matter if you're wearing
blue blockers or not if you're just
under blasting Bright Lights it's going
to suppress your melatonin and yet some
people enjoy blue blockers for that
reason nowadays A lot of people wear
blue blocker glasses or blue blocking
lenses or conts throughout the entire
day thinking that blue light is bad for
our eyes during the day I happen to
subscribe to the idea that we want as
much bright light as we safely can
tolerate during the day ideally from
sunlight in order to set our circadian
rhythm and yet a lot of eyeglasses and a
lot of contact lenses out there have UV
a Andor UVB blocking features to them so
what are your thoughts on this and I'm
perfectly happy to be wrong and revise
my my stance on this um yeah what what
what do you think about this UV AB
blocking yeah it's a good it's it's a
it's really important to distinguish
that UV light on the light spectrum is
right next to blue light red lights on
the other end and of course infrared is
beyond that and our eyes other animals
can see these but our eyes can't see
infrared that's why we call it Beyond
red and we can't see ultraviolet as we
call it Beyond Violet UV light is right
next to Blue Light UV light is known to
have a lot of adverse effects it's not
really good for our skin and therefore
you know we really want to avoid Sunburn
and kind of UV D you know exposure and
damage on our skin similarly it's not
really good on our eyes and it affects
both the ocular surface a little bit in
terms of like kind of how dry or
irritable your eyes might feel for some
people and certainly over the long term
UV light will accelerate the formation
of cataract which is a blurring of an
oxidative blurring of the lens inside
the eye profound UV light can be
damaging to the retina if you're getting
way too much on the inside um so uh so
blocking UV light I believe is just
absolutely standard in every pair of
eyeglasses and uh I don't know actually
how much to what degree the different
kinds of contact lenses also filter at
least UV light now blue blockers blue
blocking glasses is totally different
and as I say like I think almost all
glasses because the Plastics almost all
glasses are not made of glass anymore
they're made of plastics uh but I think
almost all of them now filter the UV
light which again is like probably the
safe move for our eyes and periocular
environment around the eye environment
um so uh blue blockers you know that's
been a huge fat and I'll tell you the
last three years through the pandemic
everybody getting on their computer
hours in front of Zoom meetings where we
used to walk from building to building
for a meeting things like that um I you
know I I remember you know like the sort
of big uptic in these kinds of questions
and I'm not sure that there's any that
blocking blue is helpful in any way and
as you say it may actually play into
sort of circadian entrainment of our
natural daily Rhythm so so I think
blocking UV is a good idea and I think
it's pretty standard um you know they
make glasses by the way that actually
react to UV light they're called
transitions there maybe a few different
brands I don't know uh but but you know
these are the sunglasses that are clear
except then they turn dark if you're out
in the sunlight and it's not just any
sunlight it's actually the
UV uh wavelengths that that cause the
chemical reaction in the glasses to turn
from from Clear see-through to to
sunglass blocked
glasses and um you may notice if you if
any of you out there are using these
kinds of glasses uh that they don't work
in the car you'll wear them in the car
and they won't go to sunglasses even
though it's sunny out and again that's
because all standard car glass also
filters UV that's why if you're riding
around in the car and it's sunny out
you've got your hand you know up next to
the window uh wearing a t-shirt you
never get a sunburn through the car
window anymore because all our car glass
is also filtering UV light for us so so
that's a very informative answer and
before we started recording you and I
were discussing this practice of morning
sunlight viewing which again I highly
recommend over and over and you pointed
out that low solar angle sunlight so
sunlight Light low in the sky viewed for
maybe 10 minutes a morning and again not
forcing oneself to look at it and stare
but blinking as needed is not going to
cause extensive UV damage to the eyes
it's really the when the sun is directly
overhead um that we're getting a lot of
UV which raises this other question
which is for people that don't wear
corrective lenses and therefore are not
blocking UV light to the eyes um what
should they do are they in trouble
should they be wearing a brimmed hat
brimmed Hat's a great idea that'll get
rid of a lot of the direct light into
the eye of course you still have
reflected light off of surfaces uh and
that that can include UV light of course
um you know wearing sunglasses outside
even if you don't have corrective lenses
you know it's may may also be more
comfortable to wear sunglasses outside
um so so these are all fine you know at
the end of the day it's probably not
making a huge difference in the health
of your eye whether you've spent the
last 50 years wearing sunglasses really
dogmatically for your out time or not um
you know if you were going to develop
let's just say age related cataracts
inside your eyes which we'll all get cat
if we all live to 120 we all get
cataracts you know it's going to happen
some people younger some people older
maybe if you were really dogmatic about
wearing your UV blocking sunglasses
maybe you'd get your your cataracts at
75 years old instead of 72 years old it
may not be a huge difference in that
regard um so again not something to be
super stressed I think it's I think it's
more a question of just what are you
comfortable in uh and then certainly I
will say the the other advantage of a
wide brim hat is it's keeping sun off of
your face and these are the you know
some of the especially the upturn
portions of your face like the cheeks
and the nose these are the some of the
most common places to get some of the
skin cancers that you can get over a
lifetime of sunlight exposure um so you
know the wide Brin haap is is it's
helping you for that as well can't help
but ask about Comfort at very levels of
brightness I'm the person that when
sitting in a cafe or something and on a
bright day I can be directly across from
somebody like you who seems to be
perfectly fine without sunglasses and
maybe even we're shaded under an
umbrella or something of that sort and
I'm squinting like
crazy is it normal for there to be a
pretty wide variation in sensitivity to
light and does this have anything to do
with the lightness or darkness of the
eyes you have brown eyes I have green
eyes but is there any real correlation
there yeah you know it's a good question
I I don't know if it's been formally
studied but I will tell you like I have
the same impression you do which is that
if you have uh a blue eyes or light
colored eyes that you're more likely to
have more sensitivity we know that
there's differences in the iris muscles
that constrict and dilate in response to
light uh for example when you go into
your eye care provider and they're going
to do a dilated exam and they put the
eye drops in your eye that dilate the
eyes they sort of change the the the
nerve impulses onto the iris muscle so
the iris dilates and you get those big
big open eyes um people with blue eyes
we absolutely know blue or Hazel or
light colored eyes uh you put that eye
drop to dilate their eyes it's going to
lasts four 6 eight hours whereas in a
brown-eyed person often the dilation
only lasts one two 4 hours so there's
clearly biological differences between
the irises and their muscles and maybe
the nerve that feed those muscles uh
between lyed people and and darker eyed
people uh and that may also therefore
relate to this differential sensitivity
that some people have you know if you're
not able to constrict your eyes in the
bright light as effectively you're going
to find that bright light more
frustrating more annoying uh you know
even painful people will feel like their
eyes are cramping almost uh as they try
to get that those eye muscles to
activate to bring down down the pupil
and block some of that excess light from
getting in interesting yeah let's go
back to lasic what is lasic and should I
get lasic eye surgery does it does
everyone need lasic can it help every
can it make us you know super
physiological you know can it make me a
2010 you know often it can I'll just say
that you know right up front it is
amazing people will come out of lasic
surgery uh uh better than 2020 but uh
the cornea weal about before that's the
Clear Window on the front of your eye
all the light has to get through there
and we talked about before already like
if your cornea is misshapen if the
basketball shape of it is too uh too
shallow or too steep then you're going
to need glasses to see at distance and
also at near if it's too football
instead of basketball then it's going to
be what we call a
stigmatism and uh and then you can't uh
you need a correction for that instead
of correcting with glasses that sort of
help shape the light so it can go
through your slightly off shaped cornea
instead of wearing contact lenses which
also shape the light just as it's
entering your cornea right on the
surface of the eye you can just reshape
the cornea and the way lasic does that
there's a few different versions of
lasic uh but basically the way the lasic
does that is it actually ablates or uh
uh gets rid of a little ring or rim of
that corn
tissue so that for example if you were a
little shallow and you got rid of a
little bit of that tissue around the
edge with the laser the Las lasic you
know starts with the word laser if you
got rid of that edge tissue then you're
sort of making it a little more
basketball shaped right or if you were
too steep on your cornea and you use the
laser to kind of shave off a little bit
of the the tip of that basketball right
then you're flattening it out flattening
out the cornea so it's that kind of
reshaping and the technology has come so
far that the lasic procedures can
actually correct not just the regular
aberration that we talked about but also
some of these higher order aberration
and there are different monikers for
this kind of lasc it's all I think
become fairly standard but wavefront
guided where it's actually using light
waves to measure with a very exact
localization exactly how much and where
to laser for each individual eye to make
that cornea pass the light as ideally as
possible now one or a few percent of
patients will actually have a dry eye
problem so after lck because it does
interfere a little bit with those
corneal nerves for example and I and I
do think that if you're a person who
already has dry eye hopefully if you're
asking your eye surgeon about lasic
hopefully you're being counseled that if
you have dry eye this might not be a
good idea for you just like contacts
might not be a good idea for you if you
already have a lot of dry eye um but for
a lot of people especially a lot of
younger people it's quite common I I I
think the statistics suggest maybe 15 or
20% of people who would benefit from
lasic you know who who would we who
would otherwise be wearing glasses may
get lasic at some point in their life
and um you know I used to joke you know
lasic it costs more money than a pair of
glasses but it doesn't cost more money
than 10 pair of prescription glasses
over the course of a decade or two you
know and so I used to joke that gosh if
uh if everyone had to have laser eye
surgery for their best vision and
someone came along and said hey I've got
an invention you don't have to have
laser eye surgery anymore it rests on
the ears and the bridge of your nose I
call them glasses could they have sold
those for a th000 $2,000 a pair I don't
know maybe but you know there's kind of
a cultural element of saying you know
like I don't want to wear glasses you
know I'd love to be able to walk around
without relying on glasses or contacts
of course people are very athletic or
spending a lot of their time doing
Athletics they may be quite irritated to
have to deal with glasses or contacts
people who have very severe
prescriptions I mean if you wake up and
you can't even really you know you're
fumbling for your glasses on the bedside
table because you have such a strong
strong uh prescription you can't even
see what it says on the alarm clock next
to the bed you know these are all groups
of patients who like really change their
daily lives by getting out of glasses or
contacts and taking advantage of lasic
and in I don't know 99% of the time it's
going to be like a safe comfortable
outcome for the patient do they do lasic
on
kids um there are certain conditions uh
unusual Coral conditions where
procedures like Las at used but I
believe uh it's ideal to not do it on
children uh or even even young teenagers
and the reason goes back to what we were
talking about before you are much more
likely to change the shape of your eye
the and therefore the prescription you
need and therefore what exactly the
lasic would laser while you're still in
those growing years and you really want
to be able to say hey my eyeglasses
prescription has not changed in the last
two or three or five years because if
you do lace sick and then your eye keeps
changing shape then by the next year all
of a sudden the L lasic is not doing
you're backing glasses again right you
can do a touch-up lasic do a little bit
more but it's generally you know you're
going to be a happier person if you've
reached that point in your life and
maybe that's maybe that's your late
teens more commonly it's into the 20s
where your eye has stopped changing its
prescription every year you've been
steady and stable for some years and now
you do the lace B and it could easily
last you a
decade you mentioned dry eye get a lot
of questions about dry eye and a few
years ago I think you and I were at a
meeting and someone who is very woven in
with the companies that build and test
drugs for different aspects of vision
health said you know what the field
really needs is a treatment that works
for dry eye and I thought dry eye like
of all things like why dry and then the
more I learned about it I realized that
there are millions and millions of
people that really suffer from dry eye
and for whom standard drops are just not
working so what underlies dry eye is it
some deficiency in the lacrone glands
that produce tears for the eye and and I
think of Tears is just kind of salty
water um and I wonder if they are more
than that is there an oil in there and
if we know what's in tears why can't
somebody just manufacture something that
works as well as tears yeah you know it
turns out you know we we we've got a lot
of other eye
diseases but by far the most common eye
disease and and I've been told by far
the most common eye treatment you know
purchased by anyone now granted it's
almost always over the counter things
like artificial tears is for dry eye and
uh in part that's because as we age our
tier quantity goes down and our tier
quality goes down and so what do those
two
mean we have two different major
elements to tear and as you alluded to
one is the saltwater P of part of the
tear and those are made primarily by the
lacrimal gland and there's a steady drip
of those tear onto the ocular surface as
well as reflexive tearing right if you
get an eyelash in your eye or or you cry
you're G your laal gr will actually
squeeze out extra saltwater tears uh
onto the surface of the eye and so so
that's that's where most of the sort of
wet part is coming from but there's also
essential oils critical oils these come
from other types of glands including
glands in our eyelids called mayian
glands and the oils form a surface over
the saltwater part of the tier
film and and also intermix into the
teers and as we age we go down in the
quantity of both saltwater part of our
teers and oil part of our teers but also
the quality and in particular the oil
parts uh uh can often be seen to be
going down more
quickly the the ey drop industry has
pretty much solved for replacing the
saltwater part of your teers right you
can get either bottles of preserve
preservative containing you know you
could use that bottle all month or for
for a month or two or you can buy these
strips of preservative free artificial
teers which are really basically like
the saltwater component and you can use
those preservative free ones we have
patients using them every hour if they
need to right you're not going to hurt
anything with preservative free
artificial tears you just drop them in
just drop them in yeah either ey as
often as you want or need when you feel
it it's exacerbated in the world we live
in uh uh especially these days now with
more time on computer it turns out that
when you read including when we maybe
used to read more books than we do now
but also read on the computer or stare
at the computer screen or work on the
computer or actually just even watch the
TV done very careful studies you blink
less when you're doing any of those
activities and when you blink less
you're redistributing the tears less
effectively and you squeezing out less
of the tears including less of the oils
uh as effectively as you could be when
you're blinking and so um so between
aging tier quality tier quantity a lot
of our
activities uh we're kind of in this
losing proposition now now I mentioned
that uh we're pretty good at replacing
the wet salty part of our teers but
actually as an industry we haven't
really figured out a how to really
effectively replace the oily part and
the oils do a few things including when
you have a layer of oil on top of a
layer of water the water is less likely
to
evaporate and so the oils help hold the
tears on the surface of your eye and so
if we're not making as many or as good
oils uh as part of our teer film that's
uh that's also like kind of working
against the saltwater part of our tear
um so yeah as an industry as a as a
community uh that we haven't really
figured out how to get the oil parts Sol
for either by effectively replacing the
oils or treating our eyelids in a way
kind of rejuvenating those o oil glands
getting them to kind of go back to their
youthful State again you know so the the
eyes including the eyelids and the oil
glands unfortunately they're aging just
like the rest of our body so so this is
this this is one of the major
features uh is uh is dry eye and and uh
and it's tough on patients because you
feel it it's really tough because you
feel it yeah I have yet another
experience to report where when I had
the
blepharitis which fortunately was
transient I also experienced that every
time I would blink I could feel the
blink and boy I'll tell you I we all
most of us take for granted uh what a
pleasure it is to not observe the
blinking of our eyes because for those I
think it lasted about two weeks every
time I blink I'd feel an almost
sandpaper like experience it was wasn't
particularly painful but it was very
uncomfortable because you're suddenly
conscious of every blink and it's very
distracting now that resolved when the
blefaritis resolved but I can't even
imagine what it would be like to deal
with that all day long every day really
Dreadful yes it really is and and so
you're absolutely right it's a very it's
one of our really big unmet needs and
and although for most people with dry
eye it can be managed with just the
regular over-the-counter artificial
teardrops you can buy at the GR grocery
store over the counter at the pharmacy
for a subset of people who have really
much more severe symptoms with the dry
eye it's it's really it's hard it's a
really hard thing to have to live with
all the time and and we Counsel on the
use of Tears we Counsel on the use of uh
eyelid cleaning like we talked about
before where you take either these
eyelid scrubs or a little dilute baby
shampoo to keep those eyelashes really
clean that keeps those oil glands
functioning at their top capacity for
you uh so that you're maximizing high
quality teer production reducing
inflammation is also important whether
that's inflammation from allergy and of
course a lot of people's dry eye gets
much worse in the spring with seasonal
allergies when pollen is around if you
have dust allergies in your home uh uh
that worsens your symptomatic dry eye um
uh or other forms of inflammation
there's a there's an element of dry eye
that we actually think is inflammation
kind of working against our tear glands
and and in fact some of the prescription
drops now to help combat more severe dry
eye uh are anti-inflammatory or even
lowd dose steroid types of eye drops um
so I think these are all uh sort of Next
Generation treatments I think at the at
the really Leading Edge of Next
Generation treatment is trying to better
understand the nerves on the cornea and
ocular surface and if there are ways
that we could better treat them and help
help regenerate and rejuvenate kind of
how the nerves and the and the tissue
cells are interacting underneath that
tiar film and that's where for some
patients we can actually use uh either
for example blood serum your blood serum
is actually very rich in growth
factors and many of those growth factors
it turns out empirically are really
helpful for people with dry eye so if
you're one of those people who's been
really struggling with with dry eye you
might ask your eye care provider hey I I
heard about serum tears is that
something that could help me serum tears
so is this PRP is this platelet rich
plasma related but but not the plate
platelet rich portion at least not yet
they can draw your blood spin out all
the cells you're left with the kind of
liquid part of your blood that's the
serum and then they can dilute that with
some salt water maybe with some
preservatives in some cases you could
keep it in your freezer thaw out the
bottle when you're ready to use it you
know each few weeks and uh and then then
use it just like an eye dropper bottle
and those serum tear uh actually can be
very helpful for people with with much
more advanced or severe hardto control
dry eye
symptoms uh companies are really trying
to figure out hey what are the most
important parts of the the serum can we
just identify and package just the
growth factor and uh and turn that into
a product for dry eyye patients and so
there's a lot of research on the ocular
surface and dry eye going into um going
into that space right now I'll tell you
the one other recommendation that I
always give
patients there's a fair amount of
evidence that if you're getting too much
of some of these preservative chemicals
uh which of course if you're going to
use an ey drop bottle for a month it
should have a preservative in it right
so that you don't open the bottle and
then it grows bacteria a couple weeks
later and now you're you're you're you
know you're using contaminated eye drops
uh so for bottles it's Ty to have
preservatives but I really recommend for
patients if they're using anything more
than a couple drops here and there uh
for their dry eye control to actually go
for one of the preservative free
artificial tiers they come in lots of
Brands I'm sure the house brands at at
any of the pharmacies use them too I
make them too and these are the ones
that come in like strips plastic strips
and you break one off you break off the
little cap you can use a much as you
want all day you have to throw that one
out if you have anything left over you
have to throw it out at the end of the
night and the next day break off a new
one because there's no preservatives and
once you open it you don't want bacteria
to grow in that salt water right um but
it's really good because the
preservatives can be very irritating or
even inflammatory to the ocular surface
to the surface of our eyes so we really
do want to if we're using more than a
drop or two upgrade they cost a little
bit more money they're still over the
counter upgrade yourself to the
preservative free artificial te those
are great recommendations I'm also
really interested in this serum thing uh
because you know were this discussion
taking place 10 years ago and I rais PRP
platelet rich plasma there would
probably be a lot of eye rolls no pun
intended because I think myself and a
lot of other people in the it's called
the sort of standard scientific and
medical community looked at platelet
rich plasma right alongside stem cell
therapies because they were cheek to
jowl back then as you recall before the
FDA regulations about stem cell claims
which we will get to um of course PRP
was suggested as a source of stem cells
it turns out there are very few if any
true stem cells in PRP and yet now as I
understand it PRP is an FDA approved
protocol for injection into uh the
uterus injection into pretty much every
tissue and organ system of the body in
order to quote unquote rejuvenate it and
here I'm not promoting PRP and yet it is
a very common practice now in more
standard medical clinics but it started
off kind of Niche even gray Market kind
of underground it's diverged from stem
cell therapies and we're going to talk
about major modes of vision loss in a
moment and this horrible situation that
happened down in Florida of a clinic
injecting stem cells into patients eyes
to recover vision and it actually
blinded them so we'll talk about stem
cell therapies but for the record is PRP
something that's now standard in major
opol Opthalmic clinics excuse me
including your department at Stanford
are you drawing out blood spinning it
down taking plasma taking serum and
re-injecting it or reapplying it to
patients eyes not not yet in
Opthalmology uh in eye clinics I I would
say we're sort of like right now on the
edge of uh groups are starting to study
that is it safe is it valuable is it any
better for certain conditions like on
the ocular surface than serum teers for
example this sort of diluting a
patient's own own blood serum uh so so
it's being studied it's a very active
area know it turns out that this PRP uh
plasma has uh you know again like a high
concentration of growth factors that's
probably what's responsible for a lot of
the kind of quote tissue Rejuvenation
effects uh uh be that be they as they
may but but it's being studied but it's
definitely not a standard of care yet uh
at least in in Opthalmology space and
and you know I think whenever there's
something really new it really deserves
to be properly studied we talked before
about you know at first you're going to
do trials where you just test it
carefully and a few people maybe a few
of the most severely effective affected
patients be really thoughtful about uh
you know the ethics of trying out for
safety then as you develop a little
understanding of the safety you really
want to eventually get to properly
controlled randomized what people in the
community often call double blind trials
but we in Opthalmology like to call
Double masked trials blind is a bad word
we do blind trials yeah yeah so you
really want properly controlled trials
testing is it really working is it
really deserve the claims that people
are making and that has not yet really
come to fruition at that level for
Opthalmology or I care at so we've been
talking a lot about normal visual
development ey checks and some of the
more typical challenges that people have
with their Vision but we haven't yet
touched on some of the really
debilitating stuff things like glaucoma
things like retinitis Pigmentosa macular
degeneration the things that if we could
we would all avoid and yet are out there
in the world at pretty high rates I'm
sure you'll share with us what those
rates are and as bad as these things are
there are ways to detect an offset set
their progression so that people don't
necessarily lose their Vision so if you
could could you share with us what are
the major forms of vision loss in
childhood and in adulthood and what can
each and all of us do in order to find
out if we have one of these conditions
and therefore treat it effectively yeah
that's great you know let's start by
just reminding ourselves what are the
major causes of vision loss and these
are going to differ where you are in the
world but the major the number one cause
of low vision is actually refractive
error people who need glasses and
especially in other countries
affordability access can't even get
glasses okay so that's just refractive
error but that's fundamentally
correctable the next most common cause
of vision loss is cataract cataract is
the blurring the Aging of the lens
inside the eye behind the cornea we
talked about how that is responsible for
focusing light under the back of the eye
it also has to be clear enough that the
light gets through the lens and a
cataract is a normal aging process you
know as I said if we all live to a 100
or 110 years old we'll all get cataracts
we'll all need cataract surgery we
actually as you know in the eye clinic
we see cataracts years or even decades
before they're affecting your vision in
a meaningful way so the the cataracts
are forming and that's okay but at some
point they get bad enough that it's time
to take them out we've actually solved
for cataract surgery pretty efficiently
uh we can do a four to eight minute
surgery maybe if we're taking our time
it's 10 or 12 minutes of surgical time
take out a cataract it works beautifully
99 something per of the time we put a
plastic a clear plastic lens inside the
eye exactly where your lens used to be
and there's even lenses that can Flex or
focus light from far and near so
cataract is fundamentally a there's
still room for improvement but there's
it's fundamentally a solved problem uh
the problem is is that
worldwide there aren't enough cataract
surgeons there's not access to care the
Machinery or the
lenses um cost too much money in
developing countries to get out to the
number of people who would need them
so it's actually just again an access to
care cataract is a reversible treatable
easily treatable
problem but it's number two on the list
of causes of vision loss in the world
because we don't have enough access to
care we need a lot more sort of
programming around Global Opthalmology
Global Eye Care to solve for cataract uh
just to bring that solution to countries
around the
world then after that you start hitting
the eye diseases that LE lead to what
are currently irreversible
nonreversible causes of vision loss the
number one cause of irreversible vision
loss in the world is glaucoma so what is
glaucoma glaucoma is actually probably a
little cluster or constellation of
diseases that we lump together it's a
degenerative
disease like a neurod degeneration we
talk about nurd degenerations in the
brain like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's
glaucoma is a neurod degenerative
disease it happens instead of affecting
one or different area in your brain it
happens to affect the optic nerve that
connects the eye to the brain and we
need our optic nerves carry all the
visual information from the eye to the
brain and so if your optic nerve is
degenerating in glaucoma and I should
add there are other optic neuropathies
uh so-called diseases of optic nerve
degeneration for example you can get a
stroke of the optic nerve you can have
an inflammatory disease like multiple
sclerosis called optic ntis that affects
the optic nerve uh so you can get other
optic nerve diseases but glaucoma is by
far the most common optic neuropathy and
the problem is is just like you know
just like spinal cord injury which is
also part of the central nervous system
right the brain the spinal cord the
retin and the optic nerve that's the
central nervous system and there's no
regeneration and that's why spinal cord
injury leads to permanent paralysis
while optic nerve injury or op optic
nerve degeneration unfortunately leads
to permanent vision loss so in the case
of glaucoma how do we get ahead of that
glaucoma has two major risk factors one
is increasing age there are actually
infantile and pediatric glaucomas
unfortunately and those can be much more
aggressive much more damaging when they
present so early in kids uh in babies
and in
children most of the kind of run-of-the
Mill glaucoma usually Pres presents in
adulthood and even in in the Aging adult
so much more common after 50 or 60 or 70
years old increasing the other main risk
factor for glaucoma is increasing eye
pressure the eye actually you know it
stays inflated it's a balloon it has to
stay inflated we need some amount of eye
pressure to keep our eye as a as an
inflated balloon but if the eye pressure
goes too high and we we talked about
this before you won't even feel it if it
slowly gets too high if the eye pressure
goes too high that causes
glaucoma and um and that's one of the
things that we talked about you really
include in a comprehensive eye exam when
you're just getting a screening checkup
at your eye care provider at your
optometrist or opthalmologist office
they're going to check your pressure and
just as a screening tool check to make
sure it's not too
high we can treat glaucoma
today by trying to reduce the impact of
that high pressure by lowering the eye
pressure so we have treatments for
glaucoma that Target the eye pressure we
have medications like eye drops we have
lasers that can be used inside the eye
that can also lower the eye pressure and
ultimately if we need them we also have
surgeries that can also provide an
outflow that lets the fluid out of the
eye in a controlled way so that the eye
pressure can be brought back down into
normal
ranges again the reason that glaucoma
ends up being the number one cause of
irreversible blindness in the world is
number one we can't get those therapies
everywhere in the world the
affordability of ey drops the access to
lasers or surgical procedures Around The
World Isn't equal to what it is here and
even within our country you know people
may not be accessing Health Care
effectively to get screened for glaucoma
or to get treated for glaucoma the other
big problem with glaucoma is that it
affects our peripheral vision first and
only very late in the disease does it
pinch in and finally pinch off the
center of our vision in typical
glaucomas and that's a real problem
because we don't notice if our
peripheral vision is down you know our
peripheral vision isn't that good to
begin with and if you're driving and you
can see a pedestrian step off the
sidewalk you think your peripheral
vision is fine but actually your per
peripheral vision could already start
being damaged by glaucoma and you won't
notice it in regular daily life and
that's where the importance of screening
and early detection really comes in for
glaucoma what we don't have for glaucoma
we can come back to like kind of what's
The Cutting Edge or the future uh in
these eye diseases what we don't have
are treatments that really Target the
optic nerve degenerative process and uh
we can come back and talk about that so
that's coma and optic neuropathies then
the next two major causes of currently
largely irreversible vision loss are age
related macular
degeneration and then diabetic
retinopathy now age related macular
generation is just like it sounds major
risk factor is age it's very common and
actually in the developed world you know
countries that are more developed also
countries that have a larger Caucasian
white population it's more common in
certain populations than in others um it
actually is you know definitely a
leading cause of vision loss in the
elderly population for example in the
United States um and uh there's two
forms of macula degeneration but they
both end up targeting the same part the
same part of the retina and that part of
the retina is really like the rods and
the con that we talked about before the
rods do your low light vision at
nighttime uh primarily your cones do
color vision and bright light you know
sort of normal lighting uh that we
experience you know through most of our
awake
day and in that back of the retina you
can have what's called dry macul
degeneration which is a slow thankfully
slow but slow Insidious disease that
causes the degeneration of the rods and
cones and also the support cells that
help feed the rods and cones and take
care of the rods and cones they're
called RP cells retinal pigment
epithelium it's not really critical of
course uh the names of every different
cell type but these are like the the the
light collecting cells in our eyes and
the retin and they degenerate in macular
degeneration and in the dry form there's
this slow degeneration but some percent
of people with the dry form of macular
degeneration will actually convert to
What's called the wet form
it's called wet because new blood
vessels actually grow
inappropriately under and even into the
retina and new blood vessels unlike our
mature blood vessels tend to be leaky
and so that the fluid leaks out of those
blood vessels gets into the rtina
interferes with vision and that can lead
to a much more acute loss of vision now
we have some treatments for wet macular
degeneration we have injections that go
can go into the that actually fight
against the molecules that are causing
those new blood vessels to grow and
these are antibodies that can be
injected into the eye and they can be
very effective controlling patients wet
macul
degeneration it's been a much bigger
uphill battle even over the last decade
of as advances are being made to to
really try to knock back or or or slow
down even the dry form of ma
degeneration there was just some
exciting news even just in the last few
months the first uh successful Trials of
a treatment for the dry
form uh have just shown success in
properly randomized controlled human
clinical trials phase three clinical
trials so it's an exciting time those
new treatments are not going to be a
Panacea they slow the progression like
the an anatomic progression of the
disease uh maybe by 20 or 25% so so
patients are still going to get worse
even with those treatments so there's
still a lot more to be done to really
knock back macular degeneration I want
to mention you mentioned retinitis
Pigmentosa that's like an inherited form
of a type of macula degeneration it's
also affecting the rods and cones and
also the support cells the rpe cells in
the back of the eye reiz Pigmentosa is
an inherited
form there are actually many different
genes you could have that could leave to
reiz Pig Pigmentosa in aggregate if you
add up all the people with all those
different genes uh and and it can be
very devastating because it can really
affect the vision knock out your vision
very early in life including in children
and even versions of that in babies but
you add that all up it's still much less
common and aggregate than macular
degeneration but in a way it's you know
quite a bit more severe because it does
affect people much earli in life so so I
sort of clumped those together Mac
degeneration retinitis Pigmentosa
degeneration of the rods and cones and
the support cells the rpe support cells
and then you you can't have this part of
the discussion about what are the
devastating eye diseases without
bringing up diabetic retinopathy
especially because
diabetes unfortunately really continues
to grow in especially let's say in the
United States certainly in the developed
world you know as we um especially type
two diabetes with eating habits exercise
habits contributing to a proliferation
of some of the risk factors for type 2
diabetes metabolic syndrome
obesity um we're unfortunately seeing a
proliferation a growth in the number of
people with diabetes and with the growth
in diabetes unfortunately comes a growth
of the complications of diabetes and one
of the major complications of diabet
abetes is damaged to the retina inside
the eye and we call that diabetic
retinopathy uh and there again some of
the same damage that occurs especially
when in diabetes again some new blood
vessels are growing or blood vessels are
leaky some of that can be treated with
used to be lasers and now more commonly
is often being treated with some of the
same injectable drugs that are treating
macular
degeneration um but there's still a lot
lot of vision loss with diabetes and
diabetic
retinopathy I think that's an area where
again early screening making sure if you
have diabetes that's that's an
indication where you definitely have to
be going in and getting your an at least
annual exam with an eye care provider or
having someone take a photograph of the
inside of your eye and rate that
photograph to say if you have any
diabetic retinopathy or not in terms of
interventions can we talk about diabetic
retinopathy first because because of
course type 1 diabetes is a failure to
produce insulin relatively rare compared
to type 2 diabetes which as you
mentioned is proliferating in developing
countries right this is probably
unprecedented in the sense that
developing countries have better Medical
Care typically than non-developed
countries um more opportunities for food
nourishment and yet it's clearly a
problem of overnourishment um insulin
insensitivity obesity Etc
is this type of diabetic written opathy
that one observes the same for type 1
diabetics versus type two diabetics
because my understanding is that type
two diabetes this insulin
insensitivity is a bit of a Continuum
right I mean the type 1 diabetes is as
far as I know is all or none you either
make insulin or you don't but type two
diabetes someone could be mildly in
insulin insensitive or severely insulin
insensitive and sometimes I'm told
people are not necessarily obese and can
have type 2 diabetes as well um
certainly things like smoking and
alcohol intake can contribute to that so
how equivalent are type 1 and type two
diabetes when framed Under the Umbrella
of diabetic retinopathy yeah the the the
time to presentation can be different uh
a type 1 diabetic usually presents with
sort of a cataclysmic sudden loss sudden
sort of final loss of their ability to
make insulin it usually presents in
childhood or teenage years but can
present you can have late on set type 1
diabetes because it's kind of a sudden
presentation it can take some years
after that to show any diabetic
retinopathy whereas just because just
just like you said type two diabetes can
be on a Continuum and people can have
like kind of a mild type two diabetes
but kind of be you know getting along
you know going through life kind of
maybe not even realizing you know at
first and so when you're diagnosed with
type 2 diabetes you've probably had some
insulin resistance for the years prior
to your diagnosis and so in that case
you often can have um you know like
you're you're at higher risk for
presenting sooner with the the
complications of diabetes like diabetic
retinopathy now given that the actual
retinopathy
is very similar maybe the same uh
between type 1 diabetes and type two
diabetes and again it involves things
like leaky blood vessels new blood
vessel growth there's some amount of
neurod degenerative dysfunction that
just simply occurs uh so so uh you can
have little little hemorrhages or
bleeding spots in the retina tiny little
strokes or microvascular uh uh events in
the retina uh so that can happen in
either type 1 or type two diabetes one
once you start having the retinopathy it
does look pretty similar so what can
people do to prevent or treat diabetic
retinopathy obviously the type 1
diabetic needs to take insulin in order
to survive really uh type two diabetics
need to get their obesity under control
if they are in fact obese and get their
blood sugar levels under control uh
regardless uh that's my understanding
and by extension are you seeing any
reductions in diabetic retinopathy with
people that are taking these um
glucagonlike peptide mimics um like OIC
which is used to treat type two diabetes
yeah it's been a very exciting
development for the diabetes field uh
this new class of of um of uh
anti-diabetic drugs and um so uh there
you've touched on a couple of them there
are a few key things uh for reducing the
risk of diabetes or the impact of
diabetes on your retina uh at risk of
diabetic
retinopathy uh or impact of diabetes on
your
retina uh one is as I mentioned get
regular eye exams be screened you know
any diabetic should be screened at least
once a year uh with a with a good
comprehensive retinal exam looking for
any of these uh items the number one
most important element to prevent
diabetic retinopathy is to control your
diabetes and having a real good blood
sugar control keeping your hemoglobin
A1c which is one of the blood tests that
gets used to measure how your kind of
long-term diabetes management is going
uh that's really uh you know first and
foremost the most important and that's
been shown in large clinical trials they
actually randomize patients to hey take
care of your diabetes or do a real good
job taking care of your diabetes and the
patients who did a real good job taking
care of their diabetes have much less
diab diabetic retinopathy so that's
number one it turns out that if you have
high blood pressure and diabetes that
blood pressure is also really damaging
to your retina also by the way the
kidneys and probably all the other
organs that are suffering from the
diabetic insult so in addition to
controlling blood sugar really important
to have blood pressure under great
control now both blood sugar and blood
pressure in type 2 diabetics especially
if you're cat tching them early can be
improved with some of these you know
so-called Lifestyle Changes like
improving eating watching what your food
intake is you know getting good exercise
trying to lose weight uh so uh these are
definitely on that list of how do you
get to good blood sugar and blood
pressure control but suffice it to say
blood sugar and blood pressure control
right at the top and then also including
the regular at least annual exams and
then if diabetic retinopathy is detected
and blood sugar and blood pressure
control are not going to be enough for
that patient we do have treatments as I
mentioned before there are drugs that
can be injected if your retina is
getting you know kind of leaky blood
vessels from diabetes uh there there are
treatments that we can give the eye
specifically to try to counter the
diabetic retinopathy terrific in terms
of glaucoma as you mentioned glaucoma is
related to pressure although there is
pressure normal
glaucoma glaucoma is a death of the
retinal gangling cells the neurons that
connect the eye to the brain and once
they are gone at least at this point in
human history they can't be replaced
although hopefully because of work that
you've done and that other Laboratories
are doing at some point that statement I
just made will not be true and the rgc's
can be replaced meanwhile what can and
should be do to find out if they have
glaucoma and to treat
glaucoma and is it true that even if
somebody has normal pressure that
lowering their eye pressure further
protects them against glaucoma yeah
that's absolutely right so most
important is to get screened with a
formal exam at your optometrist or
opthalmologist because you you won't
notice you won't have any symptoms if
your eye pressure is too high you won't
not you're not likely to notice until
very late in the disease if your
peripheral vision is being damaged
through the course of glaucoma so most
important as to have a screening exam a
good comprehensive screening exam will
always include checking the eye
pressures and also looking in the back
of your eye the head of the optic nerve
where all the fibers leave the eye and
carry the optic nerve information back
to the brain we can see that when we
look inside your eye and uh and and
glaucoma has a fairly characteristic
look to it in the optic nerve head so so
looking at the optic nerve head uh we
have Imaging and peripheral vision
testing that can also be included in
those screening exams so if you really
get a comprehensive screening exam you
can very reliably detect if you have
glaucoma to worry about or you're in the
clear if you have glaucoma to worry
about we have treatments and you're
absolutely right whether you start with
a abnormally high pressure or you start
with a pressure that's on the face of it
in the normal
range in either case lowering the
pressure has been shown in large
properly controlled clinical trials to
slow the progression of optic nerve
damage and vision loss so absolutely in
either case starting with high pressure
or starting with normal pressure in
either case you've got to lower the
pressure further and as I mentioned we
have ey drops those are usually the
first line there's very good data that
there's a very benign non-invasive laser
it's not the same kind of laser that
gets used for lasic but there's a benign
very safe type of laser called selective
laser tcul plasty SLT we call it and
that's also very effective as a first
line actually in the largest clinical
trial uh from which the data have been
coming out just even over the last few
years it's called the light trial uh in
the light trial patients with glaucoma
were randomly assigned to either get the
laser or the sort of most common first
strongest eye drop and uh uh that gets
used clinically and actually on many
features they both worked at least as
well but when looking out over the long
term actually the laser had some
advantages over the eye drop not in the
least of which by the way it's very nice
for patients to not have to like
remember to use the eye drop every night
and so um so that's quite helpful I
think uh to to keep in mind as a
treatment option uh early in the the
disease of course if the ey drops Andor
lasers are not enough early in the
disease we also have surgical approaches
to lower the eye pressure further you
know even with all of our treatments all
of these treatments stepping patients
through all of
this about 10 15 even 20% of patients
will lose very meaningful functional
vision and maybe 5 10 15% of patients
especially depending where you are in
the world will will go blind from
glaucoma um including in you know quote
unquote developed countries uh there's
still a very significant cohort of
patients that go blind legally blind and
then you know absolute blindness I can't
even tell if the lights are on in the
room uh so it's it's it's devastating
it's Insidious it's hard to detect
early um and uh so glaucoma is still a
tough one even with all of the
treatments that we have okay so get your
pressures checked folks and if you are
prescribed drops take your drops I hear
about patients not taking their drops
which to me just seems like baffling but
I guess having to do something day in
and day out is can be Troublesome enough
that unless people are losing their
Vision very quickly or they are very
afraid of losing their Vision sometimes
they just neglect to take them it's hard
it's hard for glaucoma eye drops it's
hard for taking your blood pressure
medication it's hard for a lot of
medicines you know if you're if you're
taking a medicine where you don't feel
better you know if you have a headache
and you take an aspirin or Tylenol or an
ibuprofen uh you know you feel better
you feel reinforced gosh taking that
pill made sense right uh but if you're
using an ey drop that like hey this is
going to protect you for the next 20
years from losing your vision but you
don't notice every day that anything's
better and by the way the eye drops
could be a little irritating maybe it
stings a little for a minute or two when
you put it in your eye some people are
even less tolerant of the eye drops it's
hard to feel motivated every day and we
know that we call that compliance we
know that it's very hard for patients to
stay complying with prescribed
medications where they don't feel or
notice a difference in a daily
way I realize that we can't stop aging
yet um but right now you can't stop
aging and age is a risk factor for
glaucoma my understanding is so is
smoking or vaping
nicotine and so is
alcohol and by that reasoning should
people strive to drink less and smoke
less including vaping nicotine less if
they are concerned about glaucoma yeah
and not just glaucoma macular
degeneration actually macular
degeneration has a couple major risk
factors macular degeneration aging just
like with glaucoma major risk factor
smoking including exposure to second
hand smoke major risk factor for macul
degeneration and for the progression and
vision loss potentially associated with
macular degeneration in the case of
macul generation there's also a couple
of genes that we've sequenced the human
genome and there's a couple of genes
associated with macul generation too
that's less true for your typical
run-of-the-mill adult glaucoma there are
genes for the Pediatric and infantile
forms of glaucoma uh so yeah smoking
100% including vaping uh it's a no no
for your eyes just like it's a no no for
the rest of your body and uh it's tough
as the eye doctor to have these
conversations with patients because you
kind of feel like well you know they
must know it already and I'm trying to
be the good guy in the room with the
patient convince them to use their other
medications but I it's it's important
for us also as Eye Care Providers to
reinforce the message with our patients
a smoking terrible idea uh for macul
degeneration also for glaucoma you know
glaucoma's interesting because the optic
nerve where it degenerates kind of right
at the head of the optic nerve where it
where it exits the eye it's what we call
a watershed Zone it's kind of the edge
of two blood vessel supplies and if
either of those blood vessel supplies
are a little bit short on blood or
oxygen supply to that optic nerve head
your glaucoma is going to get worse your
optic nerve is going to be underfed and
that's going to worsen this degenerative
process just by not having all the right
nutrients and oxygen so the other thing
is that especially for glaucoma
everything that we talk about for being
heart healthy for the rest of our body
is is almost certainly true for glaucoma
and so I also always counsel glaucoma
patients it's not just no smoking but
eat healthy have a
multivitamin uh get some exercise all
those things that are good for your
cardiovascular system are going to be
good for your eyes in general and in
particular if you have glaucoma uh or
risk high risk for glaucoma I realized
that smoking or vaping are problematic
for glaucoma and for macular
degeneration but we can't have a
conversation about glaucoma without at
least mentioning cannabis uh I did an
entire episode about cannabis which
touched on some of the real dangers of
very high THC concentration in cannabis
this lost me a few um followers I'm sure
no problem because what was important
was to convey the fact that the Cannabis
that's out there nowadays comes in a
variety of different strains and ratios
of THC to CBD there's some severe risks
of high THC especially in young males um
although not always the point being that
there are I want to be very clear about
this because for whatever reason
cannabis gets people really up in arms
they always say it's not as bad as
alcohol but guess what we did in the
entire episode about alcohol and there
the message is very clear zero is better
than any and two a week is probably the
limit and if you're an alcoholic zero is
the rule so
with cannabis it's clear by my read of
the data that it can lower eye pressure
which may undermine the progression of
glaucoma somewhat but if people are
smoking that cannabis is it therefore
going to offset any gain that one would
get from that cannabis and then how does
one account for the potentially
problematic aspects of very high THC
cannabis yeah it's a great question and
the truth is is that in most patients
cannabis will lower the eye pressure the
problem is is it really only lowers that
eye pressure During the period that
you're high from the Cannabis and the
second problem is that smoking version
of getting that cannabis into your
system the smoking is bad for your lungs
by the way the smoke from Cannabis or
from cigarettes is also terrible for
your dry eyes uh it causes inflammation
it dries out your eyes so it's also very
bad from that perspective now so the
problem with cannabis is not that it
doesn't work to lower the Press we want
to lower the pressure that's great the
problem with cannabis is that it's not
realistic for most of our patients to
prescribe could you go out and be high
from Cannabis 24 hours a day seven days
a week for the next 20 years I'm sure
some people have tried and succeeded um
but right that's not practical for most
people and certainly for young people it
could be really especially problematic I
should say absolutely so so I recommend
not taking that approach but that said I
am definitely not a decer of it and now
that there are edible forms I certainly
have patients who are using it in a
responsible way uh especially edible
forms and uh and in select cases like
that could make the difference for them
helping to keep the pressure down and
I'll say for example you know it turns
out you you've talked a lot over the
last couple years about dial curves and
circadian rhythms it turns out that our
eye pressure also under goes the
Circadian rhythm and it's actually
highest at night while we're sleeping
kind of peaks in those early morning
hours then hits a low throughout the
early day and then kind of rises again
throughout the afternoon into the
evening and uh we have a lot of patients
who they come into their Clinic visit
their eye pressure looks normal but it's
actually quite a bit higher when they're
at home and that could explain some
fraction of what we call normal pressure
glaucoma it just looks normal during the
day it's actually high at night and so
in particular some patients I certainly
have some patients who are using these
products like let's say before bed and
if it's controlling their eye pressure
at night while they're asleep when the
eye pressure would have been the highest
it may confer some protective advantage
over time but that's said again like for
most patients it's not going to be the
primary approach I'm most excited about
the idea of uh um you know Laboratories
or companies figuring out which the
compounds Within These uh cannabinoids
they're called within these products are
actually responsible for lowering the
eye pressure and could we get like a
more potent eye specific
longacting drug that's basically derived
from the concept of cannabis but works
better and is more compatible with not
bringing along all the other adverse
elements that can come with cannabis use
you mentioned the Circadian rhythm and
eye pressure and the fact that eye
pressure is higher at night is there any
advantage to sleeping in a particular
position I know this might sound a
little detailed but I seem to recall an
abstract or a paper a few years ago at a
meeting that you and I both attended
where that said that if people slept
with their head below their feet uh eye
pressures were higher than if their head
was slightly elevated above their feet
and for somebody who has glaucoma this
could make pretty substantial difference
in terms of their eye pressures at
precisely the hours of the night we
should say in which they could be doing
the most damage to the gangan cells yeah
absolutely and we will sometimes counsel
patients with severe glaucoma especially
if they're you know poorly responsive to
standard therapies or poorly able to
tolerate standard therapies we'll
counsel them if they're able to sleep up
on a couple pillows get kind of a 30Â°
sleep angle going what I don't want to
do is interfere with a person's sleep
because I just I fundamentally feel for
the total health of the whole human
being getting a good night's sleep is
maybe more important than that 30
degrees and if trying to sleep up on
pillows at 30 degrees is going to lead
to kind of restless difficult sleep
night I'd rather the patient get a good
night's sleep but if they can tolerate
it and especially if they have a sort of
a a tough version of glaucoma then we'll
we'll we'll let them try see if they can
sleep up the other really interesting
question that arises is uh does which
side you sleep on affect uh which eye
might have worse glaucoma glaucoma is
almost always with with a few rare
exceptions almost always a disease of
two eyes but it can present very
asymmetrically in fact it's quite common
to have one eye kind of have worse
damage than the other and and we don't
know fundamentally why that is but one
hypothesis was gosh maybe if you sleep
on the right eye uh then your right eye
will have worse glaucoma because the
pressure is a little higher down below
or maybe it's pressing on the pillow in
a way or something like that there have
been a couple Stu studies really really
looking at that question a couple
Studies have said the lower ey will have
worse glaucoma couple Studies have said
the higher I will have worse glaucoma so
the upshot is it probably doesn't matter
which side you sleep on we also know
when you video people in their normal
sleep pattern even if you feel you
always fall asleep on the left side of
your face people toss and turn all night
probably over the course of the night
you're spending a similar amount of time
on each eye I'm glad you brought up that
point in terms of macular degeneration
I'm curious about the things that people
can do as opposed to the don'ts in order
to perhaps offset macular degeneration
one of the things that I'm intrigued by
are the results of Glenn jeffy's
laboratory over at University College
London I had known Jeff for probably a
decade or more and he typically worked
on animal models but then a few years
ago started publishing studies and I
believe there are now two published
studies showing how red light exposure
and near infrared light exposure done
early in the day to the eye at a
distance of about 2 feet for just a
couple of minutes a few times a week
could offset some of the vision loss
associated with age related macular
degeneration in people older than 40
that's my understanding of these studies
and there's a theory there about
enhancing function of mitochondria and
photo receptors by reducing reactive
oxygen species there's a whole
mechanistic hypothesis but my question
is is that the sort of protocol that
produces significant enough offset of
maca degeneration like we should all be
looking at red lights in the morning um
or is it still too early days in order
to really conclude that I I I think the
data is very compelling the data are ve
very compelling that this kind of red or
near infrared light therapy uh can be at
some level neuroprotective and yes the
the data suggests that uh kind of
ramping up high high functioning
mitochondria is a part of that uh
activating neuroprotective Pathways in
the retina it's actually been
demonstrated in animal models and a
little human data here and there but
both for macular degeneration kind of uh
degenerative dis but also for optic
neuropathies you know like gloma retinal
gangan cells the cells that carry all
that visual information from the eye to
the brain they're chalk full of
mitochondria too and uh and so the idea
that this could be a therapeutic
approach I think is very compelling
there are a number of studies actually I
think still ongoing today really trying
to figure out what's the right dose how
much brightness do you need is there an
optimal wavelength how many minutes does
it matter when during the day you
provide that light or how many minutes
or hours um these are still very much
open questions you know what's the dose
what's the delivery um but it's it's
it's it's very promising looking and
there's biological premise and I'm
excited to see where that goes because
again that's like a that's a very
accessible uh sort of therapeutic
approach that could be brought to a very
broad swath of of people so I'm excited
about that sorry I didn't mean to
interrupt and completely non-invasive um
I should um probably mention a warning
which is if people are going to decide
that they're going to jump on this
result and do red light exposure in the
early part of the day no matter what
color a light is if it's too bright you
can damage your eye so I think this is
why you're pointing the fact that we
need established protocols um before
people really start blasting their eyes
with red light and if they are going to
expose themselves to Red Light it
shouldn't be uncomfortably bright do I
have that correct yeah that's absolutely
right you know actually uh light effect
um we talked about this a little bit
earlier um there's actually now data
also that red light and actually
interestingly studies using light at the
other end of the visible spectrum violet
light either of those in small daily
doses can also be used to prevent
progression of nearsightedness in
children in school AG children and so uh
I think we're really just on the cusp of
really understanding the biology of how
these different light therapies might be
leveraged maximally to to maximize our
Eye Health uh and both during
development and at the other end of the
spectrum uh as we age um so it's an
exciting area and I think this kind of
photo therapy is uh you know um a very
hot topic for research right now very
hot topic one has to wonder whether or
not these light therapies the fact that
infrared works and maybe ultraviolet
works is are really just capturing some
of what sunlight is naturally doing when
as you mentioned before a child or
perhaps an adult also spends a certain
number of hours outdoors I mean maybe
we're just filling in the blanks that
are neglected nowadays because we're
spending so much time indoors under
artificial lights and in front of
screens yeah yeah that's yeah very
thoughtful possibility yeah I have a
couple of we don't have to call them
quick questions but common questions
that perhaps have a brief uh
explanations uh for instance I put out a
request for questions in anticipation of
this episode and I got a lot of people
asking what are floaters in the eye and
is there anything that people can do to
get rid of floaters yeah our our eye
when we're born is actually filled in
the middle of with a a jelly it's not
just fluid it's kind of a jelly there's
collagen fibers and thankfully the whole
jelly is largely invisible so the light
can get through our eye back to the
retina without being impeded as we age
those different fibers and gels shrink
and contract and they peel off of the
back of the retina so there's just in
the middle now your your your eyeball
doesn't shrink because it fills in with
with fluid with saltwater basically
but the gel part shrinks and as it
shrinks and also pulls peels off the
retina uh it can pull off kind of little
tiny retinal bits not important to your
vision bits but just like little tissue
bits and also as it congeals it kind of
uh can get little concretions in the
jelly and we perceive those as floaters
you know little almost semi-translucent
or in some cases kind of grayish
blackish sometimes sometimes you get a
big one if it peels off the of the optic
nerve in the back of the eye as happens
we call that a posterior Vitus
Detachment you can actually see like a
moon or a half moon floer uh in Your
Vision these are very frustrating to a
lot of people um and uh the good news is
in almost all cases they will just go
away by themselves in theory it's been
played with gosh we could do like a big
surgery to chew up all that jelly
replace it all with salt water try to
get of your floaters there's risk
associated with that surgery we use it
very effectively in retinal detachments
or other diseases bad diabetic
retinopathy bleeding inside the eye we
can take out the jelly from the eye
replace it with with with salt water uh
but that's not um you know putting
patients through the risk of that
surgery just to get rid of a couple of
floaters or a few floaters that probably
are going to go away over the next few
months I actually like to tell patients
it's nothing to worry about just ignore
them and actually if you stop focusing
on them your brain will actually start
filtering them out you'll stop noticing
them if you can kind of uh not worry
about them be a little intentional about
ignoring them in the beginning and then
they do actually go away and look some
will go away these three will go away
these two will appear uh eventually
you'll stop having floaters most
patients will stop having floaters um so
we really don't like to put a patient at
risk by intervening we really like to in
this case just reassure them it's going
to be okay just ignore them they'll
eventually go away thank you for that
answer twitching of the eye is something
that people complain about I know when I
get tired I'll get a twitch over one eye
I think there's a condition is it called
myena gravis where people go through a
stressful period or get very fatigued
and I think that's a depletion of the
nerve terminal communication between the
nerves that control the muscles of the
eye and then people get this kind of
like hooded eye look um where they have
a hard time opening their eyes but
barring something extreme like mytina
gravis or staying up for two days
working or even just being a bit sleep
deprived what causes the twitching of
the eyelid and is there anything people
can do about that most of the time it's
actually just a bad nerve ending you
know uh maybe that one nerve cell you
know your eyelid is fed by you know
hundreds maybe it's thousands of nerve
cells that are doing the muscles they're
doing the feeling obviously it's the
ones controlling the muscles that can
lead to a twitch if one of those nerve
cells kind of just starts you know maybe
that one nerve cell is dying just you
know whatever the aging process uh you
know it happens in young people too
though so you got one bad fiber that's
just deciding to kind of ring off the
hook that's that's that telephone is
just ringing off the hook and it's just
activating the muscle so you're just
twitching that muscle
um I've had them as well and you can
have them not just in your eyelids you
can have this anywhere in your body like
one little spot on your leg where just
the muscle right under the skin is
just and typically it'll happen over the
course of a couple of months uh
intermittently some days more some days
less maybe it correlates with when
you're tired a little bit sometimes um
and then it'll stop that nerve cell will
either reconnect properly and stop doing
that maybe it dies we don't really know
but typically at lasts on that scale now
there are other diseases not just
myasthenia gravis you can have bleros
spasm like where you have a chronic
spasming of of of certain nerves causing
muscles to spasm and there we we can use
we can use treatments for example Botox
is a treatment that uh you know people
use for cosmetic reducing of wrinkles
for example but you know a really good
medical use of Botox is preventing that
Leos spasm and patients can come in once
every 3 or six months if they have a
really severe spasming version of what
you're describing but the regular
occasional run-of-the-mill lasts a
couple months nothing to worry about it
does not pre- anything bad happening in
your future and uh maybe let it run its
course and you'll be okay
great we've all heard that carrots are
good for our vision which presumably
stems from some peripheral understanding
about the fact that vitamin A is
integral to the photosynthesis pathway
of converting light into electrical and
chemical signals that the rest of the
ion brain can use and yet I'm guessing
that there probably aren't that many
people walking around who are vitamin A
deficient they're probably out there but
not that many especially in developed
countries and in addition in the last
really five years but in particular in
the last two years I've seen a
proliferation of supplements on the
market to promote Eye Health and
longevity of vision I'd love your
thought on this General theme of
nutrition and supplements for improving
Eye Health or for maintaining Eye Health
and before we started recording you
mentioned that Opthalmology or at least
Eye Health is one area of medicine that
has a bit not extensive but a bit of a
longer history of exploring
supplementation in rigorous randomized
control trials whereas other areas of
neuros science and Neural Health such as
Alzheimer's Etc certainly there are
brain health supplements out there but
there aren't a lot of rigorous data to
support them just yet so what are your
thoughts on nutrition um aside from the
standard thing of you know people
shouldn't be ingesting too many calories
such that they are obese and diabetic
and therefore you know Etc indirect
effects of nutrition um what are your
thoughts on nutrition and
supplementation for Eye Health yeah you
know you're absolutely right and again
in Opthalmology we actually do have
quite bit of studies there's been quite
a bit of attention over the years even
over the decades looking at this
question and I think it's worth
highlighting um a couple of yeses and a
couple of NOS for macular degeneration
which we talked about being an
exceedingly common cause of vision loss
uh there have been two age related eye
disease studies called AIDS age related
eye disease studies arids there was
arids and then arids too and those
studies were large randomized Trials of
using giving giving patients supplements
and in arids it was vitamin c and e uh
higher dose than would just come in a
multivitamin zinc and copper and then
also beta carotene and betacarotene is
one of these what are called carotenoids
it's a it's a if you look at the
extended family there's maybe 600
different chemical entities of these
catenoids and betacarotene is one of the
that's in the direct pathway of making
vitamin A and so that was the principle
in the aid study and the aid study
showed that patients randomized to these
pills compared to controls it it did the
these are antioxidants in part right in
addition to feeding into that vitamin A
pathway and um and the patients
randomized to get that supplement
mixture showed less progression of their
dry macular degeneration in the moderate
to severe range es if you had mild macul
degeneration they didn't show a
statistically significant Improvement
but I will say it's my experience you
know myself with patients and and seeing
how the field works you know if you have
mild macular degeneration even though
it's not as clinically proven we're
still often recommending hey if you can
afford that supplement go ahead and buy
that now irids Was Then followed by a
second study irids 2 also with vitamin C
vitamin E zinc and copper they actually
tested whether a slightly lower dose of
zinc would be as good as a higher dose
and a lower dose was as good as a higher
dose and then instead of the beta
carotene they tested against the
betacarotene they tried two other
carotenoids that are called lutein and
zantin and and they actually found
head-to-head that the second the AIDS 2
formula without the beta carotene and
with the ltin and xanthine uh that that
formula was even better at slowing dry
macular degeneration in the moderate to
severe population again it's not clear
how much it may help mild macular
degeneration but in the uh sort of
clinically defined moderate toward
severe group there was a statistically
sign it reduced it by about 225% the
progression of your dry maage generation
and you know over a couple of years 25%
you may not notice but over a couple of
decades you know that could really slow
down the progression of your disease now
it turns out that the beta katene they
noted a little bit of an increased
cancer risk in the patients in the arids
one who had that beta keratin mostly in
patients who are
smokers they also noticed in the second
one that if you were already not taking
a multivitamin or not eating a diet
that's already naturally rich in ltin or
zaz xanthine that the effect of that
supplement was even stronger so it was
very strong clinical trial support for
taking what we now use this arids 2
supplementation and I'm sure we can list
the formula or put it in the links under
under under your podcast uh uh that that
this really does slow maculate
degeneration so that's like a very
strong example of a yes you should do
this there's one yes brewing in the
glaucoma field right now and that's high
do vitamin B3 is in boy 3 it's also
called in its various forms either
nicotinic acid or nicotinamide uh the
nicotin sounds like nicotine but this is
not a substitute for smoking or vaping
this is a different this is a vitamin
that just has a very similar sounding
name it's in the NAD synthesis pathway
correct that's exactly right it's in the
NAD pathway NAD is one of the oxidative
stress regulators and energy Regulators
of our cells so it's a very critical
molec
in the metabolism of our cells and there
was very strong evidence in preclinical
models of mice given glaucoma that
manipulating this pathway and and sort
of increasing this pathway could be
protective in glaucoma or other optic
neuropathies optic nerve degenerative
diseases and so there have now been two
limited but randomized controlled
clinical trials one looking at glaucoma
patients looking at their visual so
they're actual visual performance and
the other looking at the electrical
signals in the eye called an
electroretinogram kind of like an EEG
does for your brain we can do an ERG for
your retina and in both of those trials
high do vitamin B3 was a found to be
very safe and B was shown to actually
improve at least in the short term
improve retinal function measured either
on visual field testing or on uh the
electroretinogram now this is now
entering clinical trials large kind of
phase three style clinical trials
actually around the world it's a very
hot topic for glaucoma the fact that
this NAD boosting supplementation with
high dose vitamin B3 might be a great
approach to helping Pro protect the
nerve in in glaucoma and uh so as I say
there's there's three or four large
randomized phase three style clinical
trials uh starting now and so over the
next year or two we'll get more data um
but I'll tell you like I have patients
and if they're at the end of their rope
and we are having a lot of trouble
controlling their vision loss from
glaucoma I'm already recommending in
these limited cases uh hey why don't you
try this it's almost certainly safe uh
and it may and it may help and it may
help protect your vision over time so so
that's that's an area that's kind of
another like kind of could be a yes
early dat is pointing in the right
direction you want to be careful but uh
but I but I am starting to recommend it
at the same time that we're actually
doing the clinical trials now that said
there are a lot of other things that
people talk about other supplements Geno
balua uh things with generic names on
the internet like you know glaucoma
preservation uh yeah that sort of thing
makes my uh gives me hives you know yeah
and and these are areas where there
might be scientific premise like a
plausible explanation for how this
should help but not good data that it
actually helps thankfully in most cases
these things are safe uh but I just
worry about patients hitching their
wagon to something that's not going to
help them getting their hopes up uh
worst case scenario not taking their
actually proven prescribed treatments
and instead using an alternative therapy
that doesn't have data to support it and
so I think there there's a lot of you
know um uh uh you know either un
unfounded
unsupported uh you know information it
travels around chat rooms travels around
the internet one person tells the next
person you know there's inappropriate
advertising for some of these uh and
there you know I really don't want
patients to be hurt not necessarily hurt
by taking something that's not helping
but but maybe hurt by feeling like ah I
don't have to go to the doctor I'm
taking this supplement and that would be
obviously a really bad potential outcome
for a patient yeah I completely agree uh
supplements are just as the name
suggests a supplement to an already
hopefully healthy lifestyle and use of
medication where it's prescribed and uh
I've often said on the podcast that um
Sometimes the best dose of a supplement
is zero milligrams um um so I do
appreciate you touching on those themes
because um supplementation is something
that comes up from time to time on the
podcast and I know that I've certainly
have seen a number of these different ey
andv Vision support supplements we
aren't affiliated with any of them um I
don't personally take any of them but
these clinical trials sound promising so
I'm going to um keep an ear to the
ground uh for
them as a final question and hopefully a
topic that we can cover in more detail
in a subsequent episode of the podcast
because I absolutely want to have you
back to discuss this in more detail I'd
like to just get your thoughts on the
fact that the neural retina is in fact
neural and it's part of the brain and we
are hearing an increasing amount of
positive chatter about the use of
Imaging the eye and the retina directly
as a way to detect other forms of neurod
degeneration for those that are
listening or for watching um you know
I'm putting my hands up in a kind of C
shape back of your eye is lined with
these with this three cell layer thick
thing that is the neural retina which
are really pieces of brain that connect
to the rest of the brain and because it
resides in the eyes and outside the
cranial Vault people like you skilled
clinicians with the appropriate tools
can look into the eye and see the brain
directly without having to cut through
the skull and my understanding is that
more and more opthalmologists are seeing
cases where degeneration of the retina
is correlated with degeneration of
structures deeper in the brain making
Imaging of the neural retina perhaps one
of the best diagnostic tools for
predicting and tracking the progression
of Alzheimer's and other forms of neurod
degeneration do I have that right yeah
absolutely actually this is a super
exciting area you know we we have this
long-standing saying in Opthalmology
that the ey is a window to the brain the
eyes is a window to the soul of course
is a longstanding saying right and and
it turns out that you know in
Alzheimer's disease as an example you
know we really talk a lot about the
degeneration of Basil forbrain colonic
neurons that are leading to the
cognitive deficits in Alzheimer's
disease but it turns out that there is
also some degeneration throughout other
areas of the brain including the retina
and since we have such a relatively easy
time Imaging the retina you can go into
your doctor's office and get a quick
little uh sort of laser scan of the
retina a picture of the retina compared
to like going through a full MRI process
for your brain uh and we can detect the
degeneration of the retina optic nerve
associated with Alzheimer's disease it
looks like the same thing is happening
in Perkins disease and Ms now one of the
issues is that in a lot of these
degenerative diseases we're we're able
to detect the difference in the retina
but we're not necessarily able to say
hey if we see this in the retina it's
multiple sclerosis but if we see that in
the retina it's Alzheimer's disease so
there may not be there may be good
sensitivity to detecting the disease and
to following whether your diseas is your
brain disease is getting worse but there
may not be very good specificity
differentiating the different diseases
and I say that with a very big asterisk
at the end of that sentence because
there's actually amazingly cool new data
one of our colleagues who you know Al
dubra has helped revolutionize a new way
of iming the retina that's giving us now
cellular resolution and even subcellular
resolution seeing things smaller than
the sizes of cells inside our retina and
recently in one of his projects he's
teamed up with another one of our
faculty Heather Moss she's a neuro
opthalmologist so she really specializes
clinically in the eye brain connection
and her research focuses on that and
together they made actually an amazing
recent discovery of very special ized
unusual novel structures that they can
detect in the retina of patients with
multiple sclerosis and whether these
kinds of discoveries or other similar
kinds of discoveries are going to lead
to kind of a a whole new generation of
biomarkers which are ways of measuring
disease diagnosing who has the disease
figuring out who's getting worse from
the disease figuring out who's
responding to therapies that we're
trying to use to treat the diseases this
is a very exciting area and this really
touches on what we're all hoping is the
future of of eye care as well as the
rest of medicine and that's that's
Precision medicine but also what we call
Precision Health we really want to not
just figure out what drug treatment to
give this patient versus that treatment
but we really want to figure out who's
at risk of even getting some of these
diseases and gosh we could intervene now
and prevent them from ever getting in
trouble in the future fantastic can't
wait to hear more about those
developments and listen I want to say on
behalf of the listeners and myself just
thank you ever so much for the
discussion today I don't think I can
ever recall a conversation that's
included so much basic science and
clinical science and also so many
actionable recommendations both dos and
don'ts as it relates to something so
critical as Eye Health I also was just
reflecting for a moment about the fact
that I think you and I met 20 years ago
when you were a graduate student by the
way folks um Jeff is uh sort of the Kobe
Bryant of sort although unfortunately
still with us in the sense that he went
directly from his MD and PhD skipped his
postdoc didn't require one directly to
being a faculty uh member most people
don't do that they do a five-year postto
in between wait and then I believe he's
going to tell me all the places I'm
wrong and I should just come clean that
um Jeff is my chairi of department at um
Stanford School of Medicine Department
of Opthalmology so for me I I see this
as a particularly warming but also um at
once predictable but pure pleasure of an
experience to get to learn so much from
you because I don't think we've had this
long to sit down and talk science in a
very long time so thank you for doing
that for my own sake thank you for
teaching us so much about how to take
care of our Eye Health and now you can
tell me where my um history is wrong
maybe my hippocampus is degenerating no
it's been a pleasure over the years I
have nothing but the warmest memories of
of you as a postto and me as a graduate
student getting to be you know nerds in
the laboratory uh years ago 20 years ago
uh at Stanford in the lab of Ben Baris
and uh and very warm wonderful feelings
about you know learning science and how
to do science and making real advances
even at that time and then the fact that
we've had the chance to cross paths in
San Diego again at Stanford collaborate
on important projects having to do with
you know developing new ways of
measuring diseases developing new ways
of treating diseases the idea that we're
going to actually bring forward some of
the advances
uh that our lab that your lab that other
people's Labs have been making in
neuroprotection in diseases like
glaucoma and Mac degeneration in
regeneration of the optic nerve of the
retina uh we are real close on a lot of
those this is a major topic of really
The Cutting Edge research that we're
really trying to keep pushing forward
because we know it's so important to
patients you know I I often joke you
know my mother had a uh a sign outside
the bathroom and it said remember how
long a minute is depends on what side of
the door you're on and I really
appreciate that like as fast as we're
trying to go with our research and
moving that into clinical research which
I think we're doing very effectively in
the department really working on Vision
restoration research in the department I
appreciate that as fast as we think
we're going it's not fast enough for so
many patients who are suffering from
these diseases so thanks very much for
having me on it's been a real pleasure
uh reconnecting over these many
important tops X I really appreciate the
chance to talk with you well delighted
to do it and looking forward to doing it
again you're an amazing colleague friend
clinician and now public health educator
thank you thank you for joining me for
today's discussion all about I and
vision health with Dr Jeffrey Goldberg I
hope you enjoyed the discussion as much
as I did if you're learning from Andor
enjoying this podcast please subscribe
to our YouTube channel that's a terrific
zeroc cost way to support us in addition
please subscribe to the podcast on
Spotify and apple and on both Spotify
and apple you can leave us up to a fstar
review please also check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast in
addition if you have questions for me or
comments about the podcast or you'd like
to suggest a guest that I feature on the
hubman Lab podcast please put those in
the comment section on YouTube I do read
all the comments during today's
discussion and on many previous episodes
of The huberman Lab podcast we discuss
supplements while supplements aren't
necessary for everybody many people
derive tremendous benefit from them for
things like improving sleep for hormone
support and for improving Focus the
uberman Lab podcast is partnered with
momentous supplements if you'd like to
see the supplements discussed on the
hubman Lab podcast you can go to live
momentous spelled o us so live mous.com
huberman if you're not already following
me on social media it is huberman lab on
Instagram Twitter Facebook and Linkedin
in all those places I discuss science
and science related tools some of which
overlap with the content of the hubman
Lab podcast but much of which is
distinct from the content on the
huberman Lab podcast so again it's
hubman lab on all social media platforms
if you haven't already signed up for the
hubman Lab podcast neural network
newsletter it is a zeroc cost monthly
newsletter that includes podcast
summaries as well as protocols comprised
of short PDFs that include everything
from a toolkit for Sleep a toolkit for
neuroplasticity or learning toolkits for
enhancing exercise toolkits for
enhancing various aspects of mental
health physical health and performance
again all zero cost and all available to
you simply by going to huberman lab.com
go to the menu scroll down to newsletter
and provide your email we do not share
your email with anybody and again it's
the neural network newsletter and it is
completely zero cost thank you once
again for joining me for today's
discussion with Dr Jeffrey Goldberg and
last but certainly not least thank you
for your interest in science
[Music]