welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Esther Perell
Esther Perell is a psychotherapist and
one of the world's foremost experts on
romantic relationships she's also the
author of best-selling books such as
mating in captivity and the State of
Affairs today's discussion focuses on
what it means to be in a truly
functional romantic relationship we
discuss this from the standpoint of
identity that is how people both try to
hold on to and evolve their identities
within a relationship and how a truly
functional romantic relationship indeed
evolves over time from a standpoint of
curiosity and Adventure but also one in
which people need to hold on to certain
components of themselves we explore What
conflict in relationships looks like and
the Dynamics that underly those
conflicts so focusing Less on specific
scenarios but rather the Dynamics that
exist in conflicts in romantic
relationship across all different
situations and different combinations of
people and of course we also talk about
what healthy conflict resolution looks
like what a truly effective apology
looks and sounds like and we explore the
erotic aspects of relationships
comparing and contrasting for instance
Love and Desire how sometimes those
things run in parallel in the same
direction how sometimes those run in
opposite directions and and how people
can explore their own Notions their own
models of Love and Desire in order to
have more effective romantic
Relationships by the end of today's
episode you will learn from the world's
foremost expert on romantic
relationships how to find build and
revive romantic relationships that feel
most satisfying to all Partners involved
I'm also pleased to announce that Esther
Perell has just released a new course on
intimacy you can find a link to that
course in the show note captions as well
as links to her books her podcast and
other resources about romantic
relationships before you begin I'd like
to emphasize that this podcast is
separate from my teaching and research
roles at Stanford it is however part of
my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to Consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is David David
makes a protein bar unlike any other it
has 28 gram of protein only 150 calories
and0 gram of sugar that that's right 28
gr of protein and 75% of its calories
come from protein this is 50% higher
than the next closest protein bar These
Bars from David also taste incredible my
favorite bar is the cake flavored one
but then again I also like the chocolate
flavored one and I like the berry
flavored one basically I like all the
flavors they're all incredibly delicious
now for me personally I try to get most
of my calories from Whole Foods however
when I'm in a rush or I'm away from home
or I'm just looking for a quick
afternoon snack I often find that I'm
looking for a highquality protein source
and with David I'm able to get 28 gram
of high quality protein with the
calories of a snack which makes it very
easy to hit my protein goals of one gram
of protein per pound of body weight and
it allows me to do so without taking on
an excess of calories again I focus on
getting most of my food from whole food
sources throughout the day but I
typically eat a David bar in the late
afternoon when I get hungry between
lunch and dinner sometimes also midm
morning if I get hungry then and
sometimes I'll use it as a meal
replacement although not a compl s meal
replacement it can get me to the next
meal so if I need to eat in a couple of
hours but I'm really hungry I'll E A
David bar as I mentioned before they are
incredibly delicious in fact they're
surprisingly delicious even the
consistency is great it's more like a
cookie consistency kind of a chewy
cookie consistency which is unlike other
bars which I tend to kind of saturate on
I was never a big fan of bars until I
discovered David bars if you give them a
try you'll know what I mean so if you'd
like to try David you can go to
david.com huberman again the link is
david.com
/h huberman today's episode is also
brought To Us by element element is an
electroly drink that has everything you
need and nothing you don't that means
the electrolyt sodium magnesium and
potassium but no sugar proper hydration
is critical for optimal brain and bodily
function in fact even a slight degree of
dehydration is known to diminish
cognitive and physical performance it's
also important that you get adequate
electrolytes in order to stay hydrated
the electrolytes sodium magnesium and
potassium are vital for the functioning
of all cells in your body especially
your neurons or nerve cells drinking
element dissolved in water makes it very
easy to ensure that you're getting
adequate amounts of hydration and
electrolytes so to make sure that I'm
getting proper amounts of both I
dissolve one packet of element in about
16 to 32 ounces of water when I first
wake up in the morning I drink that
basically over the first half hour or so
that I'm awake and I'll tend to also
drink element dissolved in water during
any kind of physical exercise I'm doing
especially on hot days when I'm sweating
a lot and I'm losing water and
electrolytes if you'd like to try
element you can go to drink element.com
/ huberman again that's drink element
spelled LM nt.com huberman to claim a
free element sample pack with the
purchase of any element drink mix Again
drink element.com
huberman today's episode is also brought
To Us by Helix sleep Helix sleep makes
mattresses and pillows that are
customized to your unique sleep needs
I've spoken many times before on this
other podcast about the fact that
getting a great night's sleep is the
foundation of mental health physical
health and performance now the mattress
we sleep on makes an enor difference in
terms of the quality of sleep that we
get each night we need a mattress that
is matched to our unique sleep needs one
that is neither too soft nor too hard
for you one that breathes well and that
won't be too warm or too cold for you if
you go to the Helix website you can take
a brief two-minute quiz and it asks you
questions such as do you sleep on your
back your side or your stomach do you
tend to run hot or cold during the night
things of that sort maybe you know the
answers to those questions maybe you
don't either way Helix will match you to
the ideal mattress for you for me that
turned out to be the dusk mattress DUS
us I've been sleeping on a dusk mattress
for gosh now more than four years and
the sleep that I've been getting is
absolutely phenomenal if you'd like to
try Helix you can go to helixsleep.com
huberman take that brief two-minute
sleep quiz and Helix will match you to a
mattress that is customized to your
unique sleep needs right now Helix is
giving up to 25% off mattresses and two
free pillows again that's helixsleep.com
huberman to get 25% off and two free
pillows and now for my discussion with
Esther Perell Esther Perell welcome
thank you it's a pleasure to be here
there are so many questions and
Curiosities and puzzles and uh
challenges around the topic of romantic
relationships but what I really want to
know is to what extent is the decision
to even think about being in a
relationship of the romantic type A
extend
of our Identity or is it really a
willingness
to potentially Embrace a new identity
and I asked this somewhat abstract
question for a very specific reason and
the reason is the following I think
everyone who's been in a romantic
relationship or even who just wants one
is familiar with the kind of Yearning or
interest or
curiosity and then also with the fact
that just like the development of our
physical body it has an arc across the
lifespan that a relationship has a sort
of Developmental Arc there's the first
meeting the first week the first month
Etc and so much of what I've seen in
your work and in the discussion about
relationships in the public sphere seems
to be trying to understand how we change
in terms of what we want and what we ask
for what we feel willing to ask for ETC
across this Arc of the relationship but
what I want to know is is the decision
to enter a R Mantic relationship a
willingness conscious or unconscious to
actually change who we are in other
words are we entering a relationship to
just be ourselves and find someone with
we go lock and key or are we really
saying hey even whether or not we
realize or not if we're pursuing a
relationship are we really basically
saying I'm willing to become a different
person by virtue of being in a
relationship I think it is both
completely both
we meet
other in order to find ourselves and we
meet an other and want to be surprised
by the self we haven't
known I think that all of us come into
this world with a fundamental set of
dual needs we need security and we need
freedom and
adventure and we need togetherness and
we need need separateness so in the
relationship you come in order to create
that identification but also that
differentiation it's it's a it's a
dialectic all the
time but what's interesting is even if I
choose you because you represent
sometimes the parts of me that are more
challenging or that I disavow or that I
prefer to Outsource so I don't have to
be too vulnerable about them what draws
me to you in the beginning because it is
different that I think May expand me and
make me change is also the very thing
that becomes the source of conflict
later because we want to change but up
to a point not too much and not on your
terms so we want change but we sometimes
are afraid of change and so we let the
other person represent the part of us
that would want to change but then we
disconnect from it so you can you become
the represent ative of that I am drawn
to the fact that you are stable grounded
structured solid reliable on time you
name it I know that this is something
that I would like to be more of and just
a very simple example but then I start
to think of you as rigid because I get a
little more than what I bargain for and
now I start to argue with your rigidity
and my desire to actually become more
structured and solid and un punctual and
reliable has somehow disappeared
so if I understand correctly we seek out
others in order to try and initiate the
process of change that we want right but
then when we hit the friction Point
meaning the point where it challenges
where we are that's right then there's a
a form of um resent or frustration the
reason defensiveness defensiveness you
know what it is every system straddles
stability and change and then grapples
for homeostasis every relationship goes
through that every every every system in
nature goes through that but the same
thing is true inside and individual we
want change and we need stability and
then these things sometimes are
compensating each other and they are
complimentary and at times they but
heads so a very practical question yeah
then what are the um necessary but not
sufficient elements that some body
should have in themselves before they go
seeking a romantic relationship meaning
um what is necessary in order to be able
to embark on the process with any chance
of success um barring you know extreme
pathology right um assuming that both
people entering the relationship have
the best of intentions to make the
relationship work in quotes yeah yeah is
it both a sense of One's Own identity as
well as what specifically they would
like to change
or is it um some other you know
constellation of factors different ways
to answer this um you know I think
sometimes people say I I I I'm want to
be with you because you help me become
the best version of myself yeah you hear
that a lot and so what is that version
you know who is it that I want to see
that I think you will help me become
when you talk about these romantic
relationships first of all I think
there's a different answer if we're
talking about Cornerstone relationships
or Capstone relationships do you know
the the concept if you don't mind
defining the Cornerstone relationship is
is where when we used to meet in our
early 20s and together we build the
foundation of our relationship we grew
together
we saved our first monies together we
got our first places together Etc it was
very much foundational
stone is the foundation has already been
established because we are tend to meet
at this point 10 12 years later so
during those 12 years I've already
actually worked so to speak on my
identity I have defined myself my values
my
aspirations my constructs how I want to
see my life and when I meet you you're a
confirmation for all of this you're a
confirmation of what I've already built
and I am putting you and me as the CH
Stone which we put on top of what we've
already created you and me you've done
the same thing so I am looking for
someone who recognizes my identity not
for someone who helps me develop my
identity from much earlier age so
there's a developmental Arc that changes
the Mandate I said it's both but the
priority of if it's the building of
identity or the expansion of that
identity what you call change differs if
you meet somebody when you're young and
if you meet somebody when you're in in
your 30s what happens when people are
mismatched in terms of age I mean there
is a big age differences a lot of the
time and in gay relationships you have
often a major um age difference that
means something else but it creates
differentiation in straight
relationships you often have men who are
a lot more a lot older than the
women very much rooted in evolutionary
bi biology I think and and fertility but
um and now we have more and more a new
phenomenon of older women with younger
men but that's actually been very rare
in most cultures so that's shifting now
towards um more more often people are
observing older women with younger men
you know when you have four movies at
this moment that are talking about this
and you begin to see the the Crescent of
a of a new cultural phenomenon I don't I
think the fact that it appears in the
Arts and in the culture usually
announces something I wouldn't make it
yet a phenomenon but you asked me a
question before about what are the
things people need I mean you know when
you Embark any relationship it's it it's
uh again it's it's I tend to think as
both end on a lot of things I come to
you with a certain self-awareness how
much self-awareness the more there is
the better and that self-awareness I
think as its best translates in the
sense of I you know I think a good vow
to say at the time of your wedding is
I'll [ __ ] up on a regular basis and on
occasion I'll acknowledge
it it means that a self-awareness comes
within self- knowledge about your
limitations your and your ability to
take responsibility for it Without Blame
and shame and and basically
accountability I think accountability is
an enormous component of relationship
it's it's and it's okay we all do things
you know we all have our wounds and our
frustrations and our expectations and
our unexpressed needs and our
unfulfilled longings Etc but it's a good
thing to know it and to admit it and to
not pretend that it's not me but it's
you you know I often say that couple's
therapy I am a practicing couple
therapist for almost 40 years and
couples often come to therapy thinking
that you're a drop off center you know
they come to
deliver their problem and their problem
is their
partner and you're going to fix it and
they're going to help you because
they're an expert on what's wrong with
the partner and it's an amazing thing
how people have tremendous Insight on
all the shortcomings of the other person
and do not see themselves as part of the
system a relationship is a breeding
living system of interdependent parts do
you think that's perhaps one reason why
people who are in these Cornerstone
relationships of whom I've known many
you know um even family members of mine
you know met in University met their
significant other and then had their
first jobs moved in together all the
things you described that there's this
um they grow up together yeah and I
think it probably happens at a stage of
life when there's still a lot more
neuroplasticity frankly I mean
everything I know about neuroplasticity
is that it exists across the lifespan
but that it tapers off significantly in
one's late 20s right and you know
fortunately it's still available but the
notion of being set in our ways as a
neuroplasticity
pH it's the closing of the prefrontal
cortex pretty much pretty much font
exactly takes a lot more to open that
plasticity later than it does earlier
certainly and yet it's um inversely
related to the
self-awareness right I mean the younger
we are the less self-aware we are about
our patterns because we just have less
data over time so I I could see how it
would be more difficult uh for somebody
in their 20s to say Hey listen I I think
I have a a good many virtues but I have
this severe issue with something or this
particularly frustrates me or here's my
laundry list of issues right whereas
somebody in their 4S or 50s um or older
if pressed could probably make that list
if they were really being honest with
themselves so it seems like a good point
you know so it seems that um there maybe
there's a sweet spot but um that these
earlier relationships I've I've always
um been impressed by them and kind of
romanticized them in my mind um because
that wasn't the trajectory that I took a
challenge you see when you grow up
together you
often put a not of energy into the
building of the unit MH and that unit
then is supposed to become your base
your scaffolding from which two
individuals can begin to grow and to
Define themselves when you meet later
you are already two individuals that
have defined themselves who now have to
find a way to create the energy to come
together so it's a different Mo movement
it's a different choreography I think
that the challenge for young couples
today who meet early in C in college and
have known often only themselves and a
few people in their teenage years Etc or
nonone is what happens when when when
they begin to change individually can
the relationship expand enough to
broaden the envelope to let these two
people you know emerge individually or
is the jacket too tight is the vest too
tight and often that it it becomes a bit
of a crisis it's because they grew they
grew together by by you know on the
basis of this togetherness um and
sometimes they can and sometimes it just
feels like is this the that in order to
become
adults it may need to happen with a
different partner and that's why I
always say I think this moment we have
two or three relationships or marriages
in our adult lives in the west and some
of us will do it with the same person
but the relationship has to
change um it's like the person changes
the relationship but the relationship
makes room for the person to change this
is dynamic if that just feels like such
a true statement to me because uh in my
um professional life as a developmental
neurobiologist there's a saying people
always think of development and then
adulthood but all of life is one big
developmental art absolutely correct and
the great psychologist Ericson spoke
about the different sort of challenges
that people face from birth all the way
until death which you know nowadays
hopefully will extend into people's 80s
90s or even Beyond well his last stage
is the generative stage It's actually an
amazing I mean he's the the most
articulate irti of stages of life I
agree if people haven't seen those
stages we'll put a link to them in the
show note captions but the idea is that
you're basically grappling with some
basic struggle that you either reconcile
or you don't at every stage so you could
imagine that these let's say these three
marriages let's imagine a couple that
meets in their 20s and does three
marriages which implies uh a couple
divorces in between maybe not legal
divorces um across their lifespan they
really are according to the Ericson
theory development or any
neurobiological examination of brain
development different people in their
20s versus 40s versus 60s 70s 80s so
this notion of three different marriages
to me seems um both logical and very
grounded in what we know about the
biology of the the brain and the self so
um a good metaphor is rooted in
science and and yet it's also kind of a
radical idea when one hears it for the
first time if framed in the context
of with the same person it sounds kind
of lovely and romantic okay they meet
it's lovely they have their first
marriage then there's some challenge
they overcome they do a second marriage
then some Challenge and a third marriage
and maybe there's even grandchildren you
imagine maybe even great grandchild
there's all this kind of uh romantic
Notions built up around it but then
there's also the reality that for many
people more than half there's a fracture
of the first marriage and that they
either remain single or marry again and
so what do you think dictates whether or
not a person can go through these series
of evolutions and actually find and
create love again and again and again
either with the same person or with
someone new or in some cases I guess
three different partners I mean mean
what what is the sort of um requirement
is it a a willingness to accept this
model and understand that who they are
at 50 is going to be very different than
who they were in their 20s you know a
good question is a question that has
many answers there's different ways to
answer
this
um I think that more than thinking about
it as they were able able to overcome
crisis it's really the ability to
redefine oneself and to redefine a
relationship it's much more creative
than problem solving you can overcome a
crisis and put it aside and stay the
same this is much more of a of a
generative experience it's a creative
experience is that you actually become a
different unit the power Dynamic is
different the interdependence is
different the the erotic charge is
different the the the the connection to
the outside world is different it's it's
really it's it's it's en liven
the you know I think everybody
understands the difference between a
relationship that is not dead and a
relationship that is
alive I I am not there to help people
survive I my work would is is about more
than that it's about helping people to
feel
alive and the redefinition of having the
same relationship with the same person
it has to be alive not just not dead and
if sometimes that alive means recreating
a new you know going to a new person a
new country a new city a new Social
Circle a new profession a new a lot of
things that we today have access to to
change things that people did once you
know when I ask an audience if your
grandparents grew up in the same
neighborhood or in the same town and
worked in the same company I mean most
people rais their hands and then I go
down the generations and then now it's
like how many how many of you have had
three jobs in The Last 5 Years so this
notion that we can create new things for
ourselves is actually one of the
greatest things that has happened in the
realm of relationships we can have kids
much later we can join somebody who has
already had those children we can marry
in our 60s for the first time we can
live in a in a trip trism we can there's
a plasticity if you want to use a word
that you that to to the world of
relationship today that is extremely
rich and expansive but Demands a set of
skills to negotiate to understand the
uncertainty that comes from having to
make so many decisions at the time with
in the past none of us made decisions
about most of these things they were
handed down to us so that level of
freedom is utterly rich but comes with a
tremendous amount of anxiety and the
man's
maturity and sometimes couples have
become so entrenched and so locked in
their story and confusing their story
with the truth and feeling that they're
living next to someone who has a
completely different version of the
story that they cannot talk to like
there is no greater polarization
sometimes than a couple that once agreed
on a lot of things that you just think
there there's no way change can end
enter this system okay so when I hear
your answer um what comes to mind is
that again as a neurobiologist I think
the brain the human brain has this
amazing capacity to focus on past
present or
future and sometimes two of those three
things uh it's kind of hard to think
about all three at once but it sounds to
me as if one of the more
functional attributes that somebody can
have if they want to navigate
relationship in a healthy way is to be
able to at least temporarily discard
with one's story about one's past and
even their past identity and the word
that was coming up over and over again
in my mind as you answered was this word
you used earlier which was
curiosity and I'm wondering if what
you're referring to is a curiosity on
the part of hopefully both people in the
relationship as to what the relationship
could become and who oneself could
become and my definition of curiosity is
an interest in finding out but without
an emotional attachment to what the
outcome is this is what we train
scientists to do you want to get the
answers but you can't get emotionally
attached to the answer Being A or B
that's anti-c curiosity real genuine
curiosity is about the process the verb
action of wanting to figure out
something but not being attached to a
particular outcome and as you were
describing of function trajectory of
relationship I was thinking okay so if
one could approach relationship with a
willingness to discard kind of stories
about one's past and maybe even a sense
of one's identity of past be willing to
let go of that a little bit and just be
curious about like where could this go
if I let the relationship guide my
evolution of identity a bit and that
takes some as you said some some
boldness because if it's kind of scary
right if you not knowing who one is
going to become if they let the other
person you know maybe lead for a while
or um or if they were to lead for a
while are these the sorts of dynamics
that you're referring to I think you
almost articulated one of the most
important pieces of my
work um I mean curiosity is one of the
top words for me um because it stands in
opposition to
reactivity reactivity reinforces the
cycle it just creat creates narrow
repetition rapid in you know cycles of
escalation it usually involves defense
and attack and blame Etc curiosity is an
active engagement with the
unknown and I like when you say without
the attachment to the outcome or the
emotional uh investment I think that's
absolutely accurate and um much of what
I do is try to have people switch from
reactive to curious but that Curiosity
means that they're willing to enter
empathically and respectfully into the
realm of another person whose narrative
is completely different I'm very
invested and familiar with the
neurosciences and the the whole work on
the brain in relationships but I am very
interested in narrative because I
believe that the story shapes the
experience and when people hold on to
the story and they don't think it's a
story they think it's fact this is what
happened last night I'll tell you what
you did
I'll tell you what happened you know
that's not the case you know and they
don't see this as a subjective rendering
it's totally valid but it's valid as
your experience and much of coup's
conversations is pseudo factual talk but
it is actually subjective once you get
that you can become curious once you are
curious you open
up but it is very challenging when
people are hurt wounded
defensive um holding tight to invite
that Curiosity it's it's what's
happening in their
bodies is about shutdown and defense and
self- protection and you want I'm doing
this physically to you because you this
is where the brain and the neurobiology
in that moment is going against what
actually is in their best interest
psychologically and exist
essentially I'd like to take a quick
break and acknowledge our sponsor ag1
ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink
that also includes prebiotics and
adaptogens ag1 is designed to cover all
of your foundational nutritional needs
and it tastes great now I've been
drinking ag1 since 2012 and I started
doing that at a time when my budget for
supplements was really Limited in fact I
only had enough money back then to
purchase one supplement and I'm so glad
that I made that supplement ag1 the
reason for that is even though I strive
to eat most of my foods from Whole Foods
and minimally processed foods it's very
difficult for me to get enough fruits
vegetables vitamins and minerals
micronutrients and adaptogens from food
alone and I need to do that in order to
ensure that I have enough energy
throughout the day I sleep well at night
and keep my immune system strong but
when I take ag1 daily I find that all
aspects of my health my physical health
my mental health and my performance both
cognitive and physical are better I know
that because I've had lapses when I
didn't take ag1 and I certainly felt the
difference I also notice and this makes
perfect sense given the relationship
between the gut microbiome and the brain
that when I regularly take ag1 which for
me means a serving in the morning or mid
morning and again later in the afternoon
or evening that I have more mental
Clarity and more mental energy if you'd
like to try ag1 you can go to drink
a1.com huberman to claim a special offer
right now they're giving away five free
travel packs and a year supply of
vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com
huberman to claim that special offer I
am a firm believer that when we are in a
stress response that we become locked in
a Time domain and not to spin off into
aention about this no it's not aention
you know put differently when we are
relaxed we can think about time and our
life and other things happening around
us and others in a far more Dynamic way
the stress response is about solving for
the feeling now it has no sense about um
or it doesn't allow us a a window into
the cognition or emotions that are
related to what could be even though we
desperately want out of there and
there's all sorts of evolutionary
reasons why this would be the case of
course but um I feel like a statement
that you made um which is that a
curiosity and a willing to discard with
one's own narratives and in particular
what you said about the that people
perceive their own experience as fact
when in actuality it's it's just two
different stories neither person is
correct um or one person you know but
people have these stories which are
almost confabulation at some point but
they feel so true to all of us when we
experience them I also feel like that's
a lot of what's happening in culture at
large people diametrically oppose camps
really believe that the same thing is a
reflection of two completely different
series of facts and and it seems almost
unsolvable at the level of culture
there's too many people but at the level
of two individuals I feel like it to be
um tractable you know I have gone to a
lot of meetings in the last year on
issues of
polarization at on on societal levels
and and I often think like what is a
psychologist or a couple therapist doing
in those meetings why am I invited here
and then I think you know what you
actually have a lot of experience with
polarizations sitting for a long time
with couples who once actually
thought in the presence of the other I
discover
myself now you know can be so at odds
they're sitting in the same room they're
listening to the same session they have
a complete different interpretation of
what I said and what it meant and they
leave and you wonder did it happen in
the same room the same thing is about
what they describe about the night
before it's like and if you didn't see
them together and you saw them each
alone you would be complet completely
mistaken because it's like swiss cheese
everything that one has left out is
where the other one
starts
so we learn a lot from doing couple's
work around the process of polarization
of the around the process of intractable
conflict around the this sense that you
are my enemy and and there is nothing in
what you say that I can recognize or be
empathic towards or or understand
understanding I think on a societal
level the people who have studied
intractable
conflict
um basically have a method and of how
you bring two opposing parties
factions uh tribes you know who have
been in conflict and at War for a long
time and how do you bring them together
there is there's actually a method a
process it's not it's written in stone
but you know you certainly don't start
by talking about the things that drive
you completely apart and unable to talk
to each other you start by finding some
elements of your shared
Humanity in a couple because that that
is the the the space we we talk about
now in a couple it's an incredible thing
how you people can literally think that
the other person wants their demise you
live day in day out with some someone
who you have who you really think wants
to hurt you is your enemy and sometimes
there are there is evil you know there
there's people who don't have good
intentions but in many situations it's
it's a it's also a projection it's also
experiences that you've had in the past
and this is where what's interesting is
that the narrative the conscious
narrative lives here and the what you
call the brain that can only locate it
itself in three temporal and the brain
and the physiology are in a different
time implicit memory is completely
influencing explicit
narrative yeah people are incredibly
prone to confabulation based on these
unconscious things going on and it it's
kind of a scary thought if I feel it
this is what's happening that's right
right and because we are creatures of
meaning we need to reconcile those
things and we need coherence in our
narratives and that coherence is what is
so difficult for when when you work with
people who are hold what is it that
they're holding on to I mean you know
one of the classic examples is some you
know someone says I'm really sorry I
didn't mean to and the other one says
that's not the case you know like if
someone tells you I didn't mean to hurt
you you would think that someone would
say Ah that's reassuring I like to hear
that I hope that's true um makes me feel
a lot better rather than proving to you
that that's not true you wanted to step
on my toes you you intentionally put
those heels on or those shoes or you
know those fists to to to to step on me
and that coherence of maintaining the
idea that if I feel that you hurt me you
must have been wanting to hurt me rather
than you know I can be hurt and that
doesn't mean you intentionally were
trying to do
anything it's as if I need to justify my
being hurt by the by the intention of
what you did and to just make sure
sometimes that's the case it's not that
there are not people who intentionally
want to hurt some people but at other
times what I'm highlighting is that the
coherence to make sense of why I'm
feeling this way demands that I also
Define what you are trying to do to me I
mean and in reality um most people are
terrible at understanding how they
themselves feel let alone someone else's
intentions I mean if somebody apologizes
and says listen I'm I'm truly sorry I
screwed up and the other person says um
I don't believe you I think what they're
really saying you can tell me if I'm
wrong is I don't feel better as a
consequence of your apology that's
because your apology I screwed up is
incomplete most of the time people say
that I made a mistake I'm sorry and but
it doesn't acknowledge what the other
person felt in response to what we did
so let's say that the apology also
includes that I you know I really messed
up it makes total sense that you would
be upset you know we had an agreement
that we would meet at 7 and I didn't get
home until 9: and I didn't notify you
until
8: I would be upset too that's totally
justified that sucks that's got to
really suck
at that point if the other
person still feels like it's still
frustrating um presumably it's
because either this is a
pattern um so this doesn't this one
apology doesn't encapsulate all the
other the the the sort of litany of
other things that relate to this of
feeling unseen or unappreciated or you
know there's often a lot more behind
this the event apologize many times
right um or yeah it could be a pattern
of apologies that don't equate to change
or it could be a pattern of an apology
that um doesn't encapsulate all the
other things that weren't voiced because
sometimes people won't voice their
grievances at because they for whatever
reason but there's a lot of resent
that's built up right so in that moment
when somebody um tells another that they
are um not convinced emotionally
convinced uh what what are the tools
that you give each in order to be able
to navigate that stick taking point I
think apology is an amazing Topic in the
realm of relationship it's a huge piece
apology forgiveness ownership
responsibility accountability that whole
range of
things I think if you give that apology
many times somebody and and it's not yet
you're doing this every
Tuesday the person will probably just
say thank
you if you have someone who can't
receive an
apology and the apology is sincere
that's the first and foremost thing that
accompanies an
apology then you begin to ask why is
this person struggling to receive this
because it is the thing that you should
be
getting and then you start to ask
yourself is it
because if I AC accept your
apology it's as if I agree that what you
did wasn't so bad it is
repairable and in order to really make
clear that a grievance is big I cannot
receive your
apology that's one of the Dynamics that
often occurs in that moment and and so
you ask sometimes you know you sit and
you see you see somebody who pretends to
say I'm sorry you see somebody who just
says come on what's the big deal and
then you see people who really are are
sincere and then you watch what's
happening to the other person are they
relieved are they
suspicious are they feeling like they
would they would dissolve a certain
element of their identity if they don't
hold on to
this um is it as if they're saying you
know you can get away with it you know
it's not as bad because accepting the
apology is to minimize the issue and
then you switch burn on the other side
you know in in
Judaism you apologize three times and if
after the third time and you've done a
real Reckoning apology if at the three
time the other person does not accept it
the burden passes over to the other
person interesting this is my money des
and I think it's an incredibly
interesting
idea that at some point the person has
made the amends when they have and and
when you cannot receive it then now the
burden passes on
you I'm just going to hover there for a
second because I agree that apology is
such an interesting and important
concept and you mentioned that accepting
somebody's apology at an emotional level
not just saying thank you I accept your
apology but really internalizing that
and allowing space for it to shift your
experience of the the thing that hurt
and by the way accepting the apology
doesn't yet yet mean that you forgive
forgive is your freedom you decide at
what point you do it and you may do it
alone it's not always a diic experience
apology is a diic experience but
forgiveness is freedom yeah I appreciate
that distinction um now that you've
given it I mean I appreciate you giving
that distinction I did not uh make that
love this topic because it's so it's
really so many things happen underneath
you know there's issues of Shame around
apology what's the difference between
shame and
responsibility what is the capacity of a
person to have real distress rather than
empathic distress real empathy rather
than empathic distress so it it's a a
portal into a lot of things you know
they're people who can never apologize
is that right oh yeah because to do so
would what for
them shame I think a lot of that pieces
around shame it's not I'm because self
esteem as as my friend ter says is your
ability to see yourself as a flawed
individual and still hold yourself in
high
regard when you admit your flaw it means
there's something wrong with you then
it's very hard to say I'm
sorry this is the essence how do you see
yourself as
imperfect flawed but you still respect
yourself and you hold yourself in high
regard if you can do those two things
you can apologize very
easily I find that so much of being an
adult again in quotes yes yes you would
hope uh involves um
the disambiguating
two
things uh one is we're taught to really
trust our own experience to some extent
to stand our ground when we know a is
true and B is false but then also part
of being an adult is admitting when
we're wrong and um and there's no
rulebook no real-time rulebook for that
especially given that people have
different versions of the same thing
often but it seems to me
that one of the great challenges in not
just in romantic relationship but in
relationships of all kinds is to really
be able to slow down and enter the state
of mind and body that allows us to do
the kind of processing you're talking
about so at a very practical level I'm
curious let's say a couple comes into
your office and they're dealing with um
a either a single hurt or a Litany of
hurts or something like that do you m uh
believe it's important for them to shift
out of their emotional state to be able
to process differently do you have them
at the beginning of a session do you
have them do a couple deep breaths
together do you have them recall a time
when they felt particularly bonded is
there an effort to shift their somatic
state in order to bring their mind to a
place of more curiosity or is going
straight to the issue often the best way
in first of all I like that we that it's
interesting we going from apology to
conflict it makes total sense I I spent
the last year creating a whole course on
conflict and how do you turn conflict
into connection beautiful what is good
conflict you know I think conflict is
inherent to relationships and then what
are problematic ways to deal with
conflict yes on some
level you there is very little you can
hear if you are in a state of
hyperarousal if you are in a position of
self- protection I mean all these
stressful places all these cortisol
levels going up Etc are not going to
help you but at the same time you can't
in the moment that someone is uh
completely
agitated talked with them about trusting
it's just like the physiology is not
corresponding so it's a it's a real
dance um I don't do the breath often
sometimes I I actually don't do anything
all the time I I I'm working like a
tailor I do fittings I I mean I think
the richness of therapy is is is in its
art on some level let maybe um but
sometimes I just say I think you need to
stand up and move and just listen to
what your partner has to say but don't
sit
sometimes I say don't look at each other
sometimes I say turn to each other some
things are better done face to face and
some things are better done side by side
you know parallel play
fishing there's a lot of like you know
driving every parent who's ever had a
kid in the back knows this the the you
don't you have both you have moments
when you need to be able to look into
each other and then in moments where you
just need to do this something about the
side by side
then it's also the limits of words when
is it important to talk and when you
know we're talking because we are Homo
sapiens but in fact if we were animals
we would be just making noises we're not
really making sense so stop talking
so what I try very hard to do
is to not let people show the worst side
of themselves they can do that at home
they don't need to come and shame
themselves in my
office and I do know that certain
situations will draw the worst out of
people but that doesn't mean that that's
who they are and that's one of the big
things as a therapist is to to not fall
for that and just because if you met
these people alone they would be
charming and if you had met them maybe
two years before they would have been
Charming too so something's happening
between them that is making them act and
react from places of deep hurt and fear
and attack and all of that and
aggression
and sometimes I see them
alone I don't think that you are capable
of having this conversation at this
moment because you're not willing to
take any responsibility when you're
sitting next to your partner you're in a
blame Fest we're not going to do that so
I'm going to talk with you alone and
then I'm going to prepare you to come to
your partner with at least one or two
things that you can own what am I doing
to contribute to this mess or what am I
doing to make things better I like to
start a session by asking what did you
and if I'm dealing with a kind of
chronic conflict low intensity Warfare
or bigger depends what kind no there's
different kinds of but I like to ask
what have you done this week to make
things better what a great question what
have you done to make your partner feel
that they
matter rather than what happened this
week you know know I I kind of have a
sense please do not tell me the last
unraveling you know I got it it goes
from one from 0 to 60 no time and none
of this I I don't need the details of
the story I need to know what you're
doing to each other what feelings you're
instigating in each other I don't need
the plot I the plot is you know there's
only three dances this fight you know
aiming at each other withdrawing from
each each other or one person
withdrawing and one person
pursuing those are three types of major
choreographies of
conflict or quiet silence or one goes
after the other who is closing the doors
and they follow them through the
house which is following them to a lot
of other things and from that place on
you decide okay who is doing what to
whom who is feeling what at the hands of
whom how what is influencing this you
know um this person is once again
feeling that when this one didn't talk
to them they were being given the silent
treatment that they used to feel when
they grow up and um and then and this
feeling of neglect and and dismissal is
just crushing them because they suddenly
feel like they've been rejected
completely and this one is feeling like
they're once again being attacked and
invaded by this other person who keeps
following them and wants to talk when
they
have and is remembering when they were
living in the place where they grew up
where they couldn't wait for to get out
because they were feeling completely
flooded and overwhelmed by the [ __ ] show
of their house and these two stories are
now dictating what's happening between
these two people these two people are no
longer adults in the room their younger
selves have completely taken over their
amigdala is completely flooded and then
and then it matter it depends sometimes
because I'm a little bit narrative
driven I may make the
mistake to actually go to the story when
in fact these two people really put some
times I sit for 10 minutes quiet I say
we're going to just wait for for our
systems to regulate because even I get
agitated it's not like it doesn't absorb
I don't absorb it I say I think we need
some sitting here sometimes I put
music I love music so I put music you
know um I just say I don't think a
single word is going to help
here and sometimes I say I think we
should stop the
session I mean it depends if you think
there's something that can be gained if
you start to feel like it's just going
to make it worse and
sometimes I in the middle of the session
may say when's the last time you made
him a cup of
tea and the fact that you can still make
a cup of tea to someone who you would
like to Str
angle it's really special it's amazing
how we can inhabit two completely
contradictory feelings at the same time
I can't stand you get me the hell out of
here and I can't imagine my life without
you those things coexist love and hate
side by
side I'd like to take a quick break and
thank one of our sponsors function I
recently became a function member after
searching for the most comprehensive
approach to lab testing while I've long
been a fan of blood testing I really
wanted to find a more in-depth program
for analyzing blood urine and saliva to
get a full picture of my heart health my
hormone status my immune system
regulation my metabolic function my
vitamin and mineral status and other
critical areas of my overall health and
vitality function not only provides
testing of over 100 biomarkers key to
physical and mental health but it also
analyzes these results and provides
insights from to doctors on your results
for example in one of my first tests
with function I learned that I had two
high levels of mercury in my blood this
was totally surprising to me I had no
idea prior to taking the test function
not only helped me detect this but
offered medical doctor informed insights
on how to best reduce those mercury
levels which included limiting my tuna
consumption because I'd been eating a
lot of tuna while also making an effort
to eat more leafy greens and
supplementing with Knack and
acetylcysteine both of which can support
glutathione production and
detoxification and worked to reduce my
mercury levels comprehensive lab testing
like this is so important for health and
while I've been doing it for years I've
always found it to be overly complicated
and expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the test done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function health.com huberman function
currently has a weight list of over
250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to huberman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to function
there's something that I really want to
revisit that you said um you said it
incredibly clearly but I have never
heard this described um and I think it's
so so very important for people to hear
and
internalize including me that I'm going
to ask us to visit it again but not
because you weren't clear but just
because I think what is it
so as a biologist when we teach biology
the good biologists who uh good teachers
we emphasize names only because people
need to know them this is called that
this is called that but it's all about
verbs it's all about processes and
Dynamics and what you just described as
the three verb states of conflict I
think I've never heard articulated that
way so you described um if I understand
correctly pursuer pursu right either
pursu one person pursuing another no
pursuer
pursu each other loger heads and those
are escalations okay two arrows pointing
at one another arrows and not in a good
way no not in in Conflict it's usually
not at a good way you know and you there
are there's a whole interpretation of an
attachment style that underlies why to
people in the situation of threat go on
the attack you have two people fighting
MH you have two people flighting fleeing
and you have one person who flees and
one person who fights that's another
language for pursuer pursuer distancer
distancer pursuer
distancer and in each of those cases it
seems that the first step to getting to
a more functional Dynamic to try and
sort this out whatever the conflict is
is to somehow change one's mind mindset
from talking about the story of what led
there or stories of what led there to
really starting to parse the feeling
states of ourselves and hopefully
empathy for the feeling state of the
other it's feeling States and
physiological States it's two different
things the physiology is more primitive
more basic it's physiology senses
feelings thoughts
is the way I would you know but because
we I say it you know because we are Homo
sapiens and we think we we really this
thing about coherence and thinking that
what we say has meaning is is extremely
powerful to the point sometimes of
delusional you know because I have to
believe this because there would be too
much dissonance if what I feel and what
I think and what therefore happened
didn't all have a coherence to
themselves
and it you know sometimes when you see
it in the room you kind of say they
never said that yeah it's almost like a
psychosis of sorts I'm not calling
either person psychotic it's psychotic
because it's a disconnection from
reality I would say it's such a a a a an
inhabiting of an internal reality that
it is disconnected from the possibility
and this is where curiosity comes in
it's the possibility that what you are
experiencing is completely real in its
experience but that doesn't mean it is
factual or it is real in reality you
know and to when I'm hurt and when I am
thinking that you want to harm
me it's very difficult for me in that
moment to be willing to be empathic
towards you and there are relationships
where this is the truth I want to
constantly come back to that because not
everything is imagined sure you know but
there are many other relationships where
um why would why you know why would he
want maybe he he he stepped away because
he just thought that whatever was going
to come out of his mouth he would
regret it it's not because he doesn't
care about you in fact it's the
opposite and he knows what he can
sometimes say he day she doesn't matter
but not because he wanted to just throw
you to the Wolves it's almost like we
lose our theory of Mind our ability to
place our ourselves in the mind of
another in a in a healthy way when we're
in these stress States I'm curious it's
funny you call it stress States because
stress to me is so physiological that it
doesn't include the relational
components sure I mean there needs to be
a word for stress that involves the
emotional reality and that emotional
reality that now may be somewhat
imagined and this is why it's
complicated was once
true what now is an internal truth once
was what really happened and that's why
we imagine and this is how we interpret
the dynamic it's it's very important to
add that so the the past was real there
was someone in the past who actually did
this to me but when you do this I think
of them I I bring those two things
together I I Collapse the past and the
present and that's why I'm convinced
this is what you're doing to me too and
so how do you take somebody out of their
physical and mental and emotional past
to be grounding themselves into the
present so so that they can consider
that this person that is next to them is
not doing to them what once was done to
them right and my mind immediately goes
to what you just described as a shift
from focusing mainly on the past and how
it's making us feel in the present to
how we're feeling in the present
acknowledging and understanding
something did happen it that was real as
you said and yet with this curious eye
toward the future of what could unfold
that's probably the
hardest nugget of couple's
therapy I mean I do individual work too
but if we talk relational therapy this
is one of those nuggets because people
are not aware that they are in their
past they are convinced that this is in
the present it's a collapse of time
zones and realities it's what makes us
so rich it's what makes us so able to be
creative and Artful but it's what
sometimes
makes it very challenging for us
especially in romantic relationships
because you asked at first you began
with romantic relationships a lot of
what we say here is true for friendships
and work relationships but there is only
two relationships that mirror each other
it's the one we had with our first
caretakers mostly our parents and the
ones we have with our romantic Partners
people can sit in the office and tell
you I don't have this with anybody else
and it's true often you believe him
because nobody gets as close to you and
nobody elicits in you the kinds of early
yearnings and and and and and emotional
needs than a romantic partner and that
is very
interesting I don't know if it's a bug
or a feature as the uh Engineers say but
it is remarkable to me um that the very
same neural Machinery that forms the
under pinning of infant primary
caretaker relationship is repurposed for
romantic relationship I mean I Marvel at
that interesting right I mean the brain
doesn't have like oh here's your
developmental wiring circuits and then
guess what you get to hit adolescence
and you go through puberty and then you
get this new circuit for forming a
romantic attachment the brain Imaging
shows us that it's repurposed so it's
it's like if you got a 2 plus 2 equal 4
algorithm in that circuit let's call
that securely attached although I
realize that language is not sufficient
but for just purposes of discussion okay
well then great then you get healthy
romantic attachments as adults or you
you as an adult then perhaps you can
navigate in and out of things that are
unhealthy more
quickly however if you got a 2 plus 2
equals 5 algorithm wired into that
circuit well then you're forever looking
for something that won't that is
essentially dysfunctional that's the
simplest version give me more about this
repurposing it's really interesting yeah
so um beautiful work by Alan Shore and
others has yeah um his work I know
you're familiar with has shown that you
know you you image the brain of infant
and typically it's mother but they've
done other caretakers as well and you
see this incredible mirroring of sure
right brain left brain activity more
dopaminergic or serotonergic activity
basically the the the takeaway is that
you see a lot of coherence what's going
on in the mother is going on in the
child and vice versa and it's there's a
lot of
reciprocity but sometimes in unhealthy
caretaker infant relationships the
so-called you know anxious attached
dissociative or you know avoidant type
scenarios the ABCD baby type thing
people can look that up um if they like
we can provide a link um you see a
mismatch in the neurochemistry and the
activation of these brain areas in other
words that the brain circuitry for
attachment is is set up so that um you
know anxious states are evoked when calm
States should have been um have there
been better parenting okay all right but
then you take those you run the same
sorts of studies on romantically
attached young adults or older adults
and what you see is it's the same sets
of neurons the same circuits I mean this
is remarkable nowhere else to my
awareness nowhere else in the nervous
system do we repurpose neural
circuitry from early in life you know
it's as if there's a neural circuit for
uh sensing thirst and drinking early in
life and then later it's used for
sensing uh how to navigate a city okay
now that those are two very disperate
things but this is this is like out
outrageous right and so I say it's
either a feature or a bug we don't know
but it is the way it is right I would
say I wasn't consulted at the design
phas what you think was the was the The
evolutionary logic of that I like to
think in a kind of romantic way
that some of our most important work in
our lifetime is to try and resolve these
developmental miswiring yes that are the
consequence of
um faulty caretaker infant relationship
and you can't blame the infant now does
that mean we blame our parents to the
point of ostracizing them well one would
hope not maybe in some cases that's
necessary but I
think I like to think that what we've
observed over the last 10 20 30 years in
no small part seriously thanks to your
work reflects an evolution of how we are
thinking about attachment that we are
actually getting better at understanding
the self and there's something about the
human brain that wants to understand
itself very interesting so I like to
think that in a hundred
years not only will there be more models
of relationship as functional healthy
relationships but there will also be a
deeper understanding of what this whole
thing of love and attachment really is
and the parallel I use is one of biology
we understand so much more about brain
function now than we did just 10 years
ago addiction for instance you know not
just a a condition of failure of
willpower but this understanding about
dopamine you know um and other molecules
I think we now look at a a feny addict
or a heroin addict very differently
they're caught in a
neurochemical algorithm that is not
serving them well it doesn't remove
their responsibility but there comes a
point where they can't recover
themselves and they need certain
supports and those supports are starting
to emerge now so my hope is that this is
built into our our evolution
as some sort of
um Vector
toward progress you know it's
interesting because some models of
coup's work of couple's therapy will
say you have recreated with each
other
patterns of your early
life in order to be able to transcend
them right the uh repetition compulsion
you get the same thing over and over
again Lord knows I've had that um and
some wonderful partners and by the way
as I say that I'm also taking 50% of the
responsibility so it's all or 100% of
the responsibility for the choice um as
they say you didn't have six hard
relationships you had one hard
relationship six times right I think uh
Paul kti says it that way but that yes
that the repetition compulsion is a
unconscious attempt to resolve the core
conflict that arose during attachment
correct do you subscribe to that view I
think it's a very useful idea you know I
was thinking at one point it's like
sometimes when when when I listen to you
and you know there is an exactness in
the things that you describe often
rooted in science and research Etc
couple's therapy or Psychotherapy
relationship
[Music]
thinking it's you don't have an exact
answer um it's
first of all you don't have an exact
answer because modern relationships are
more complex than ever and I don't think
any relationship expert at this point
can have answers you have invitations
you have ways of thinking that are
useful and here is the question is it
true for me is answered by to the people
does it resonate for them if they bite
it then it's true it's a framework I can
analyze this Tableau in multiple ways if
this is the one that resonates for you
this is what we're going to go
with and that's what makes it true this
is a very interesting thing there's
multiple I mean to me it's interesting
because there's a whole movement within
the world of psychotherapy and
psychology that wants to actually become
much more norti with protocols and the
same thing for everyone I think that
much of what at least relationship
therapy which is really the world in
that I practice in is is existential and
it's meaning making and there's a lot of
ways to do that so um if this
interpretation works for you be my guest
but that's not because it is more true
than another it's the one that was
useful for you and that makes you much
more humble I love that answer it's a
little bit like when you raise kids you
know you think that I used to think that
all these things I had done with my
first one you know is because I had such
good ideas then I had a second one and
not of these things worked with them
because it was a different person you
know so I realized that the first one it
worked because there was a fit between
my method and the person and this is the
important thing in therapy is that it
it's an issue of that fit is what you're
looking for we hear a lot these days
about the different attachment Styles or
languages of love uh you know the love
languages you know people will say I you
know I emphasize you know gifts feel
very rewarding or acts of uh what is it
words of affirmation um you know
unstructured time or etc etc or people
will I think nowadays if they look into
it a little bit they'll um realize that
they are either you know more avoidant
or more anxious these things can shift I
mean I think it's wonderful that that
people are thinking about these things
in the same way that I think it's
wonderful that people understand that
there's a molecule called dopamine it
can do certain things serotonin certain
things but I'm curious as to whether or
not you feel that the the naming of
things and the assignment of oneself to
a
category can sometimes be limiting in
terms of one's ability to really Embrace
this curiosity and you also use the word
invitation and you you are describing
couple's therapy and healthy
relationship as a bit more of an art
form than a reductionist protocol
oriented science which I love because to
me you know despite being a scientist
the some of the great mystery of life
and certainly of romantic relationship
is um when you find yourself in happy
places that you didn't anticipate
finding yourself or in a place of uh
forgiveness and close friendship when at
one point you can recall being as you
said like you just this person like
embodies the worst things in your mind
so I think um I wonder
if the processes that you found useful
in your clinical work is it possible to
formalize those in a way that people can
start to adopt to them um in other
words do you think that we can learn to
navigate relationship in more healthy
ways not just by saying I'm anxiously
attached or avoiding or securely
attached I'm looking for someone that
has that or My love language is this and
they love to do that and so therefore
we're a perfect lock lock and key I
think people are starting to think about
relationship in in a more um nuanced and
sophisticated way and yet also what I'm
hearing is it's a lot more Dynamic than
that and that some of those
categorizations that we assign ourselves
can really perhaps be limiting to what
could be it's a great question but I
have a moment now as if I'm in a session
with you where I have like five things
are arriving here in front of my brain
and I'm thinking which one am I going to
am going to enter um I I I'm going to
actually start with just the the actual
question but then I I probably is an
opportunity to say a little bit about
how I approach this thing I think some
naming is very useful it frames it it
gives it a a a found a foundation
something to hold on
to language matters if we would not be
having a conversation without having a
shared language at this moment but
within that you and I are using the same
words and may have very different
meanings attached to it so that's the
richness of the of the process is what
do you mean when you say invitation
curiosity you know conflict Etc when I
for example when I do the work on
conflict I I did provide language for
example one of the things that happens
in conflict is we have confirmation bias
that's a cognitive framework that is
often present in situations of emotional
conflict of conflict which involves
always something an emotional Dimension
could be political too confirmation by
means that I am looking for evidence
that reinforces my beliefs and I
disregard any evidence that contradicts
it now this happens between two people
this happens between two two parties
this is a that's a very important naming
you know it's interesting I've noticed
this this this this but all you
mentioned is
that okay cogn
bias another cognitive bias that is very
common in is is fundamental attribution
error you know we have this idea that I
am complex and you are more simple if I
if if I'm in a bad mood is because there
was traffic you know the circumstances
there's context if you're in a bad moon
is because you're a contous person
that's just your personality you know
will categorize and totalize the
behavior of others and we'll have lots
of nuance and poetry for our own that's
a concept that concept is very useful
it's neutral it doesn't blame anybody
and it says we all do this I like that
kind of naming this very different from
the kind of naming that pathologizes
people the kind of naming that locks you
into one identity you know you may have
addiction and addiction may be really
important that may even have destroyed
your life but to just say you're an
addict I've seen so I worked in an
addiction Center for for two years and
you know people people had a lot of
there were a lot of other things
happening in these people's lives and to
just focus on this one thing is it it it
reduces the person but it also reduces
your ability to do something with the
person it Narrows your lens so it's
always this question about how wide is
the lens that you that you don't get
overwhelmed so you want to make it
smaller but not that small that you that
you're looking through a keyhole a
person is more complex than a keyhole
you know with don't just treat symptoms
we we work with
lives that's the difference of for me
anyway in the work that that we do and
that and then when you begin to think
about lives then you start to think
about culture what is happening in the
world of relationships today it's such
an incredible thing that is going on and
and if you don't put that in the broader
context I'm trained as a systemically
oriented family therapist and that means
that you're looking at the interaction
of different
systems and I think that a lot of what
happens is a hyper individualization of
these things and the naming is useful
when it expands your understanding the
naming is not useful when it locks you
into a symptom a a reductionistic thing
that that gives false
certainty to
profits I no you got can't agree more
that you that naming
uh that expands one's understanding and
maybe even lends itself to a hint of
curiosity stands a chance of of having
some rehabilitative um Quality to it I I
feel that nowadays there's such an
overuse of psychological terms um like
narcissist gaslighting therapy terms
it's it's almost the way that if people
were to talk about neurobiology as um
neurosurgeons right I'm not a
neurosurgeon but I have friends who are
and neurosurgery is like something
people trained for many many many years
for just as being a uh clinical
psychologist people trained for many
years for and have a ton of in Office
experience uh Real World Experience
nowadays the naming and the attachment
of names to particular top Contour
features of people out there seems to be
largely for the purpose of um closing
off possibility as opposed to increasing
possibility however it's both because on
the one hand more than many other forms
of medicine or health care or care
Psychotherapy psychology but certainly
Psychotherapy was always stigmatized and
still is in many parts of the world it's
for the crazies it's for it's for people
there must be something fundamentally
wrong I mean it's something that nobody
went around talking about the fact that
they are in therapy you went to see a
therapist you know now you're putting it
on your on your dating app you know it's
a status symbol
so there is a destigmatizing that is
very important but there is also words
that are weaponized and they are not
useful and they and they are separating
people and we have enough separation at
this moment in our Societies in the west
we don't need more efforts to pull
people apart we need efforts to bring
back the collective the community the
the the shared
experience because we are too far
apart and that's why I think that some
naming is useful and some naming is not
always that useful well Amen to Bringing
people together more I um yeah such an
important mission right
now I'd like to explore the possibility
of something that I've heard but I don't
know if it's true um that sex
which of course doesn't just include
intercourse but the things that lead
into and out of sexual intercourse but
that sex is a microcosm for the
relationship at large meaning that the
Dynamics that show up in uh intimate
interactions are somehow reflective of a
larger um working out or or um Dynamic
uh in the relationship to what extent do
you think that's true it's a concept
that I've I've heard um it it's sounds
interesting and um uh any discussion
about sex tends to you know get um
people's ears bricked up because uh it's
uh depending on where you live in the
world it's either something that people
talk about um casually openly or with a
lot of um you know uh electricity around
it but um I always like to say you know
as a biologist we can all agree on one
thing which is that we're all here
because um sperm met egg if not inum in
in Dish and then eventually inum so
we're still at at that point in uh
Evolution so um what are your views
about intimacy and sex as a reflection
of the relationship and here what I'm
thinking of again are these um when you
described conflict you describe these
three different uh uh positioning of
arrows towards one another separate away
from one another one chasing the other
is there a parallel uh for healthy
relationship that we can offer up um
sexually yeah um for uh talking about
this question of whether or not um sex
is a microcosm of the of the larger
relationship the health of the
relationship let me start like this I
mean I've I I I've studied sexuality for
quite a few decades now in relationships
but I think maybe because of what you
said around the
world Love and Desire are Universal
experiences but the way that they are
constructed are highly culturally
contextual
and so the most archaic rooted
traditional aspects of a culture or a
society are lodged around its beliefs
and attitudes and behaviors towards
sexuality and relationships especially
the sexuality of
women American elections case in point
but the most radical Progressive changes
that take place in a society also occur
around sexuality and relationships
sexuality of women in particular so
sexuality is a window into a
society sexuality is also a window into
a relationship and into a person that
invites deep
listening one of the big challenges is
that modern sexuality has
been I mean traditional sexuality was
identified with procreation modern
sexuality is identified with performance
and
outcome sex is something you do do to
which I say let's drop the performance
and outcome for a moment and let's think
of it as an
experience so now you you're going to
start to see my the choreography I draw
when I think of sexuality as an
experience and I say sex isn't just
something that you do sex is a place you
go so my question to you is where do you
go in sex inside yourself and with
another or others do you go to seek deep
spiritual union a deep intimate
connection Transcendence do you go to a
place for vulnerability a place to
surrender a place to be taken care of a
place to be safely powerful a place to
be nauy a place to have just plain fun a
place to abdicate your responsibilities
of good citizenship because sexual
desire is quite Politically Incorrect
where do you go in sex what parts of
yourself do you try to connect with what
is it that you're expressing there
sexuality is a coded language for our
deepest emotional
needs our wounds our fears our
aspirations our our longings it's that
that is you know sex is never just sex
even when it's hit and run and then it
becomes really interesting so one of the
things that one of the assumptions that
existed very much at the heart of my
field and that I challenged or
questioned was that sexual problems are
by definition the consequence of
relationship problems so you fix the
relationship and the sex will
follow and I together with many
colleagues have helped a lot of
relationships get along better fight
less laugh more enjoy each other and it
changed nothing in the
bedroom because in fact maybe sexuality
is not a metaphor of the relationship
maybe sexuality is a parallel narrative
to the
relationship and that in fact when you
change the sexuality in a couple you
change the whole
relationship but not necessarily in the
other
direction so that opened up a whole that
was one of the foundational ideas for
mating in captivity my first book
because I I have been trained to think
like this and and then I began to think
Love and Desire they relate but they
also conflict they're not one and the
same and they don't need the same things
they don't thrive on the same elements
and modern relationships romantic
relationships have wanted to reconcile
those two fundamental sets of human
needs into one relationship that is the
grand
experiment of Modern Love and am I
correct in interpreting what you just
said as that
Love and Desire are fundamentally
separate that they can exist in parallel
but that any goal of society much less a
couple to try and unify those as one
thing is not going to succeed no no no
not at all it it actually has been
remarkably successful the Romantic ideal
is tenacious you know many other
philosophies and ideologies of the end
of the 19th century have all gone this
one has survived many others I'm
relieved to hear you say that the
Romantic maybe I grew up on too many I
did on I don't know how many romantic
comedies I saw but I I grew up in a home
where um
love sex and romance were discussed in
very almost ethereal terms yeah no no no
I think that it's a but it is an
experiment it's not something that we
have tried throughout history in human
history
so I think
that if you ask an it's an exercise I
like to do sometimes I
divide your page in a with a line in the
middle up from top to bottom and on the
top left you write when I think of love
I think of then go to the other side and
when I think of sexuality I think of and
then you go back and you say and when I
am loved I feel and when I am desired I
feel when I'm wanted and when I love I
feel and when I want or I desire I feel
and when I think about the love between
me and my partner if there is a couple
and when I think about the sexuality
between me and my partner and then you
let people free associate about
this and the there are words that you
find back and forth and then there are
words who just never appear in the other
column do you recommend that uh couples
exchange these documents they do it at
the same time then they read it out loud
in front of each other I do it in groups
you know huge audiences as well but what
I'm asking people to see is when you
look at what you responded in both
categories create a line between those
two is it a thick line like what happens
in love is completely separate for me
than what happens in desire I need a
complete different set of things I
express myself differently I interact
differently or is it very much that when
this exists it completely ignites that
they are interrelated interdependent one
feeds on each other one reinforces the
other there is a degree of variety about
that for some people Love and Desire are
inseparable and for some people they are
often retrieve irretrievably
disconnected and I think the model wants
them to be really together and for a lot
of people it's exactly what they aspire
to for other people it's more
challenging because somehow in them it's
there's a there's a split between these
two things some
people experience love in such a way
that it sometimes because becomes
challenging for them to make love to the
person they love what I mean by that is
that
love comes with a sense of
responsibility worry care about the
well-being of the other person and some
of us sometimes have learned to love in
a way that comes with extra worry extra
responsibility extra burden we were the
parents of our parents we took care of
our depressed parent we took care of our
alcoholic parent we learn to love with a
sense that is not free that is not
curious or playful because curiosity
cannot happen in a St state of stress as
you so well said when we experience love
with that extra sense of Burden it is
difficult to be with someone that you
feel close to and at the same time go
inside yourself and completely chill and
relax in pleasure land that's one of the
scenarios there's many others but this
is one of the more common ones Michael
Bader's
work that makes it difficult for some
people to experience Love and Desire at
the same time the more they love the
more challenging the desire becomes for
them because desire ex is is to own the
wanting it's it exists in you can't make
someone want you can make someone have
sex but you can never make them want
want is your sovereignty your autonomy
your freedom and for some people that
wanting cannot exist when they are with
someone that they feel so responsible
and worried and anxious about and that's
the attachment piece that you're talking
about so this is how attachment style
often manifests in the way that you then
organize your sexual
self what percentage of infidelity do
you think reflects somebody's inability
to um integrate this uh love component
From Desire component um such that they
find that they
only uh
experience desire or strong
desire um outside their their committed
relationship look I wrote an entire book
about in about infidelity as in what
happens when desire goes looking
elsewhere I think that some people go
outside for to ex as a response to a lot
of discontents in the relationship
loneliness being the first one neglect
indifference um
conflict
rejection sex ual rejection in
particular but some people go
outside um and it has very little to do
with the
relationship it sometimes has to do with
how they organize themselves in the
relationship to the degree that in order
to feel a certain Freedom or ability to
think about
themselves they go they need to be
outside and it's I used to say I have
seen a lot of infidelity in happy Rel
relationships it's not always a symptom
of a flawed relationship by no means and
that in those situations people tell me
it's not that I wanted to find another
person it's that I wanted to find
another self or to reconnect with lost
parts of myself and I don't say this to
promote or to condone or anything but I
just listened across the globe one word
it's not that I wanted to find another
partner is that I wanted to find
something else inside of me and I don't
know how to do that in the relationship
that I'm in and that's not because of
the person I'm with that's because of
what I do to myself in the context of
intimate connection and the word that
you hear all over the globe when people
who you interview people who are in
Affairs is that they feel
alive it's kind of the erotic as an
antidote to deadness they feel that
aliveness and that doesn't mean they
often that doesn't necessarily involve
sex it's about something aliveness is
that the erotic not the sexual and the
erotic is the quality of liveness
vibrancy Vitality hopefulness curiosity
imagination playfulness it's those
elements that often people
lose for a host of reasons
life work children dying parents illness
economic hardship you name it you know
and there's a sense that they need to go
elsewhere to find that
and some people would say [ __ ]
justification and some people understand
that at the heart of Affairs there is
betrayal and long and duplicity and
lying and all of that but there is also
longing and
loss on an existential level that's a
very different lens into this
so the people for whom that
reconciliation that you talk about is
more
challenging are often people who
are often more likely to
compartmentalize what you just said
brings me back to this idea that we were
exploring at the very beginning of this
conversation that it seems that so much
of navigating relationship in healthy
versus unhealthy ways depends on this
internal Dynamic within ourselves of an
ability to be in close intimate
relationship with
another and yet hold on to enough of our
own identity right and evolve that
identity within the relationship to the
other that is the definition of intimacy
or a definition of intimacy and that is
probably the number one task
of every relationship a romantic
relationships is how do I get close to
you without losing me and how do I hold
on to me without losing you now you know
I said to you in the beginning that we
grow up and we have both needs
togetherness and
separateness and then we come out of our
childhoods and some of us need more
space freedom separateness and some of
us need more protection connection
togetherness
of course we tend to meet somebody whose
proclivities match our
vulnerabilities and so you find that in
many relationships you have one person
who is more afraid of losing the other
and one person who is more afraid of
losing
themselves one person more afraid with
the fear of Abandonment and one person
more afraid with the fear of
Suffocation this is a recurring Dynamic
that you see and does it um swap back
and forth across couples
um male female um I'm assuming in that
um example heterosexual relationship but
even homosexual relationships you'll see
it um switch back and forth or it tends
to be a pretty stable feature meaning
one person in the couple tends to be
afraid of Abandonment the other person
abandonment by the other the other
person more deeply afraid of Abandonment
of themselves right it it doesn't switch
back and forth it switches by
relationship but not within one
relationship you may have been a
different in different roles with
different partners indeed I
have uh so interesting again not be
because you weren't clear you were
incredibly clear and concise about this
but I think this is such an important
concept maybe you'd repeat it for us
again just so that people can really
drive it into their Consciousness and
maybe ask themselves the question are
they more afraid of Abandonment by the
other or abandonment of themselves you
know one of the ways that you sometimes
can see this is
that I mean in the tour this week one
woman stood up and basically said I
recently divorced I would like to be
able to enter another relationship again
and I said is the issue an issue of
trust or is the issue was there betrayal
was it what's LED she says how do I how
do I allow somebody to enter into my
life without losing
myself so it's in the language you know
it's one person but this could and
really I think it's very important for
me many of these things are not gender
specific nor orientation particular this
this is human but and I answered a
little bit with some of this and and
other things and so then the next
question is how often do you not say
what you really
think because you want to
please or you want to harmonize or you
want to avoid
conflict how often did you then resent
the partner who actually stood for their
ground because if you're afraid to lose
yourself you're often more the one who
stands for your ground you don't give in
because you some and if it's rigid you
don't give in at all because you think
that every time even the language
agreeing is giving in and giving in is a
losing a part of myself I mean it's it's
buil in it's so you know it it it starts
here and it continues all the way it's
like so you I mean it's like it's a
sequence of things you break apart in in
small granular pieces how does it play
out for you when you lose yourself what
are the things you do not
do that facilitate this
dissolution and to the other person who
is um when you're afraid sorry of losing
the other and when you're afraid of of
of losing yourself like where's your
rigidity where is your kind of
totalistic thinking where is this unle
lack of flexibility and that may
manifest in I don't travel to those
places you know the sentence that
indicates that we're dealing with this
bigger issue is something sometimes very
anod you know I don't go to those kind
of restaurants you know why should I go
to those kind of places and you kind of
want to say why is there such intensity
about the restaurant what are you
fighting against and what are you
fighting for and why are you even
fighting we're talking about going out
supposedly supposed meant to be fun now
you start rewinding you know what is
this statement go connected to that we
are going to have Co you know so now you
have conflict meeting identity meeting
connection to another person this is
when the the and and it is sleuth work
it's fantastically engaging and exciting
it's like when you do scientific
research it's that sluth work that you
say this thing doesn't fit at all you
know why do you want me to wear blue
shoes why do you make such a big deal
out of the blue shoes what are blue
shoes for you don't start talking about
the shoes please talk
about you know boundaries but boundaries
today is a concept that has become so
ill used almost so it's talk about how
the preservation of the self now
involves not where in blue shoes I mean
you get what I I I do and and I I my
mind um keeps flitting back to this
parallel construction of these circuits
were built in infancy and childhood and
Adolescence and I'm uh what kind of
flashed to mind is when we are
adolescence and teenagers there's this
fundamental question that we ask that
rarely do we ask again later in life I
mean maybe people do but the question is
kind of who am I you know teenagers try
on a lot of different identities often
and how they dress you know is one of
the ways in which they self-identify
their music I mean the music we listen
to when we're teenagers and young adults
is forever stamped into us as like some
core part of our identity it has an
emotional weight that music that we
arrive to later doesn't unless it
resonates with that early music or um
recapitulates that rather so in my mind
I'm thinking I wonder if these circuits
that are struggling with uh holding on
to self versus a kind of a playful
curious exploration of new things
novelty which is so fundamental to
relationship and they're not they
they're as we say it's neurobiologists
are are really antagonistic that they're
really in a push pull I mean there's so
many things that we're discussing today
that really feel as if these are um like
circuits that can't be coactive easily
that they they're like that we're in
this internal grappling match and what
keeps coming to mind but they also need
each other right they're right they're
they're like the um right it's like the
front axle and the back axle of a a
vehicle like you can't exist without
both you just made me think of something
because you asked before that the thing
about the sexuality and and and I like
the concept of erotic
blueprints which I work with a lot and
um and I try to really kind of distill
it in in in this desire bundle course
that I'm I'm releasing that it cuz I
thought how can people ask themselves a
set of questions like a lot of my work
is about finding the good questions that
will you know a good question this like
a portal right and the the the the line
on top which is the answer to your
question is tell me how you were loved
and I will tell you how you make
love not just how you love but how you
make love meaning that your emotional
history is inscribed in the physicality
of sex and it's all about what you asked
me in the beginning identity and
change holding on to oneself connecting
with the other sexuality is the place
where this occurs at the most
fundamental level it's to be inside
oneself and inside the other at the same
time their Universe not their
orifices that is what is the experience
that temporary Oneness that then again
opens up as two people so people who
struggle with that
emotionally how do I stay connect to me
and then to you without this
polarities experience that in Sex and
then you ask a set of questions how did
you learn to love and with whom were you
protected by those people but who took
care of you or did you have to flee for
protection did they take care of you or
did you take care of them did they hold
you rock you cuddle you or did they harm
you or violate you or shake you was it
okay to laugh and to cry was it okay to
experience pleasure was it safe you know
a set of questions like that and this is
where people enter their erotic
blueprint and get to see that their
emotional challenges are directly if you
film them if you watch them making love
you'll understand and their emotional
challenges but then comes the next level
and if you then study their fantasy
lives then you'll understand the depth
of their emotional needs which are
brought into their sexuality fascinating
you get it I get it I get it and it um
makes me think that this earlier
discussion we were having you know is
sex a microcosm for the larger
relationship it sounds to me like the
answer is yes
but especially the relationship to self
and especially the like there's a lot of
information in one's uh desire template
or blueprint about how one was cared for
or not cared for your sexual preferences
your sexual
fantasies are a translation of your
deepest emotional
needs not sexual needs emotional
needs you know my mother used to say
tell me about your friends and I'll tell
you who you are and then I said you tell
me about you sexually and I will know a
heck of a lot about who you
are but you have to translate don't the
problem of sexuality in modern society
is the literalness with which we
approach it and in our pornographic
Society ever more so to our detriment
right I couldn't agree more and I think
that there also seems to be this attempt
to directly translate from well if
somebody had issues with their mother
mother then they're going to have issues
with women as an adult or if they had
issues with their father they're going
to have issues with men as an adult
that's confirmation B right but in
reality it's the algorithm it's the
algorithm um it's that these um
algorithms that are laid down in our
neural circuitry earlier they don't care
about U male femaleness I mean it
doesn't change whether or not people are
heterosexual or homosexual that's it
ain't to them I I believe I think these
are frankly biologically driven but the
idea is that our ways of being um don't
translate directly that way that these
are deeper processes so if one had
issues for instance with their who's
male and heterosexual but they had
issues with their father they could have
the same issues with women as an adult
right that it could translate that it's
not always mapping uh male to male
female to female I have a a a segment of
my podcast where should we begins that
opens the tour
where basically they talk about how they
met and then they are they fight about
everything all the time and they think
that they're fighting this is the line
of the show they think they're fighting
about the closet the cat litter and the
cat what I think they're fighting about
is that when she says why didn't you
close the closet he instantly thinks of
his dad who was this military guy who
told him you know and he is basically in
a fight saying to her you ain't telling
me what to do you the boss of me so she
can never make a request for which he
doesn't feel like she's controlling him
and he answers with this fight and that
throws her into the she grew up all
alone you know took care of her two
siblings mother was gone etc etc and she
hoped her whole life she would finally
meet a partner and she wouldn't feel
alone and there would be somebody to
support her and every time he says to
her you ain't the boss of me don't tell
me what to do she says oh I'm going to
be alone for the rest of my life here I
am in the worst place that I always
wanted to avoid this is what they're
fighting
about but they're talking about why did
you leave the cat Closet
open this is beautiful example beautiful
example it cuts across our preconceived
notions that if somebody had a good
relationship with their mother they will
have good relationship with women if
they good relationship with father with
men it's a little bit more subtle and
complicated Nuance than that I think the
Frameworks are useful but they
Frameworks and the they're models that
help us to think and make sense of
things but it's a little bit like in
science you know the truth of today is
the joke of
tomorrow I had heard that but but uh uh
that one's going up on X
um repair work is something that is so
fundamental to healthy relationship it
connects to our what we discussed about
apology what is your uh recommendation
for how couples think about repair work
let's assume that they're still together
and um there's some at least uh hint of
a hope to recover the relationship
should repair work be framed as
um in a particular way to facilitate it
um you know how does one begin I mean I
I can sort of been uh we've been doing a
lot of Threes today so I can imagine
mistakes
misunderstandings and
betrayals right there are mistakes like
I accidentally step on somebody's toes
there's uh misunderstandings to people
thought the same thing and then they're
outright betrayals and my understanding
from your work is that you've seen many
couples indeed helped many couples
recover from all three of those
categories to the point where they are
quite satisfied with their relationship
there's a sequence to this and it's to
in Intimate Relationships it's to in
friendships I'm very interested in
friendships these days and in in
Friendship therapy I do co-founders work
I mean there's other diets that I'm very
interested in beyond the the Romantic
unit but you said something before that
I I thought actually I may come back to
when you said you know it's about
acknowledging that you were
wrong sometimes you may not have been
wrong but you were hurtful
mhm and rather than get all you know I
didn't do anything I didn't do anything
it doesn't matter
what you did even if you don't think it
was anything terrible seem to have
really upset your partner do you care
about that or you want to just kind of
stand so I think the first piece in in
repair work and and I think by the way
that repair is not the end of the story
The Revival is the end of the story much
better word the you know the erotic
recovery erotic in my sense of the in my
definition of the word so that's what
when I say it's not enough to survive
it's I I I I'm I'm a child of survivors
I wanted to see people who how do they
continue to live not just how do they
stay alive and I think that's a
fundamental
difference in our lives and in our
relationships it's a huge piece of it's
really at the heart of my work and of my
life you know
so every trauma process the say the you
know of Nations or of
individuals demands the
acknowledgment of what
happened and that acknowledgement
involves remorse and
guilt for the hurt and the harm that it
caused even if you don't feel guilty for
the act itself and you think the ACT is
Justified the consequences of the act on
the other person person is where the
guilt and the remorse must take place
without that there is very little option
for repair if I if I don't feel that you
even know what you did to me my you my
dad you my boss you my political enemy I
mean that it's it's really at the root
so after you do the remorse and the and
the guilt the next part is to be really
careful that you don't sink into the now
I'm going back to relationships into the
shame I'm such a terrible person how
could I do something like this so I feel
so bad about myself that I still can't
feel bad about you now that's
narcissism that's the different story
the point is not for you to still think
that you're at the center you were at
the center when you heard and now you're
at the center of the of the your own
wound it's really a process of Reckoning
with the other person and it's slow
challenging for some and it's immediate
for
others and then I think the next piece
in a relationship is not just to
apologize and to to to show your remorse
but it's actually to show that you value
the other person because hurting a
person and especially when it's betrayal
and careless is a devaluation of the
other person you didn't matter what that
me mattered more than you for whatever
the reasons it was still selfish and I
devalued you and to become the Vigilante
of a relationship is that you become the
person who protects the relationship by
showing that the other person really
matters and in detail that sometimes
means you know how are you today is
there anything you want to talk about
you still think about it you know this
is going to this is a big one to carry
every day are you able to go to see this
movie can we you know just without being
so afraid that every time you ask
you're going to get blamed again or
you're going to feel so bad about
yourself it's a little bit step out of
yourself and just reach out and just
check in half the time when you say how
are you and do you want to talk The
person says no I don't but I just wanted
to know that you are prepared to in case
I needed to set the conditions make me
feel that you value me and our
relationship which you have just trashed
and then the third thing is what I call
the erotic recovery it's the it's the
Regeneration or the generation of new
cells in in you know it's I need a new
skin to come over the scab that's the
real you know repair is not yet
healing the healing is I know I hurt
myself somewhere it's it's here I can
feel it when I touch it but I don't feel
it the whole time it's not front and
center every moment of my obsessive
rumin
but when I touch it it's tender it's
wounded it's it's a place that I need to
make sure not to hit again and don't
hurt me again and don't do this to me
again I I can't recover from that twice
it's very it's that vulnerable and then
it says let's go do new things you know
erotic recovery is not about comfortable
and familiar and the return to the
status quo erotic recovery is about new
risky curious play unknown imagination
outside of the comfort zone so that we
can see ourselves a new as who we are
and how and who we are together and I
think that's where the Revival takes
place it's hopeful it's possibility it's
adventure it's got that energy beautiful
aspirational and realistic too this uh
notion of not notion forgive me this act
of
truly getting outside of oneself to be
present to the way the other person
feels irrespective of who was right or
who is wrong if it was a
misunderstanding betrayal but especially
in cases of betrayal the exiting of as
you said um either a stance of not
wanting to look at it for oneself or of
self- flatulation both are self-centered
yeah so really getting
into real genuine care for if not car
taking or the offer of care for the
other person I hurt you that bad you
know one of the big things is people are
often shocked at the hurt of the I
thought you wouldn't care what I thought
I or I I didn't think about it I just
didn't because there is a dissociation
that takes place when you when you take
off and so the when people are faced
with the the
raw hurt wound
suffering collapse fracture of the other
person they find it very hard to
tolerate and this has to happen you have
to be able to to know the consequences
of your action if you want to you know
freedom in the existentialist San terms
involved the ability to take
responsibility for the cons the
consequence of your actions this is it
I'll help you face that that doesn't
mean that you become the worst creature
on the planet but you are you have to
face that and that is something very
hard for us because sometimes we meant
it sometimes we thought we deserve it
and sometimes we didn't that we didn't
think that that was going to be the case
and
so it's sometimes easier to stand in
front of someone else's anger than
someone else's hurt yeah absolutely and
what you're describing also perhaps at
least partially explains why sometimes
not always apologies are insufficient
necessary but not sufficient because
there are certain um modes of apology
that
don't show us that the person is who's
apologizing
is really outside themselves they're in
their own guilt they're in their own
shame and therefore they're not really
present to how we feel no no there's a
beautiful book by harat learner about
apology that I often recommend in these
situations because she really analyzes
if you ever do apology you know she she
this concept of sincerity of of the
apology that actually shows that I care
about you and not just about restoring
my dignity and my pride and all of that
you know the the the the Maneuvers that
are about self-preservation versus the
Maneuvers that are really about
restorative
justice who is ready for
relationship and for people who are not
in relationship or who
are what sorts of questions should they
be asking themselves what what sorts of
um things should we all be
doing you know what's a question that I
ask people often almost in the first
session knowing yourself as well as you
do what do you think makes it hard to
live with you great question um my
answer is far too long to give here uh
everyone will be relieved that's that's
that will give you some of the material
about you know who nobody's ready as in
I'm prepared I'm I'm I'm perfect I'm I'm
I'm fully baked I I say to every person
everyone has relationship issues they're
going to have to address at some point
in their life the only question is with
whom not if just with whom who's the one
that you're going to do the work
with we're all works in progress we are
notoriously imperfect rather
unpredictable and many relationship
problems are not problems that you solve
they're paradoxes that you have to learn
to manage well I want to make clear that
um before what I say next um that if I
had my way uh we would continue this
conversation for uh many hours if not
days perhaps There's an opportunity for
that in the future but uh I was told um
and not surprisingly that you're in a
tremendous demand you're on a live tour
now I can't wait to see this it's all
sold out so I'll have to wait like
everyone else but um sounds like an
incredible experience indeed I know some
people have spoken directly to them uh
who attended one of your lives recently
and they sound like a a completely
immersive and um experience like no
other so I'm very excited about that um
my only regret about your tour is that
uh we have to Halt this conversation um
in the next couple of minutes and I and
there are a couple things I I just want
to reflect back to you um that are all
from a place of real deep appreciation
uh first of all for bringing forward
what you've brought today um you're one
of these exceedingly rare
people with whom when they speak like
gems just fall out of them and I know
I'm not alone in sentiment I mean uh
just in today's conversation you've uh
transformed the way that I think about
relationship self identity neurobiology
uh love sex uh so many um key topics and
in a much larger way um as you pointed
out and I completely agree the themes
that you're talking about are not just
fundamental for us to resolve as
individuals they are not just
fundamental for us to resolve in couples
or whatever relationship configuration
people happen to be in they're societal
they're societal that we can look at
anything uh an election uh two countries
battling one another political groups
whatever at every level this is this is
what it it means to be human built up
from the same fundamental circuit same
fundamental Dynamics and I really see
you as not just a Pioneer but the
pioneer of this parting of the veil from
what has I think until this point in
human history been a lot of descriptions
of things of what's right what's wrong
this and that and and some of that might
be true I don't know I'm not qualified
to know but that you represent a real
parting of the veil into the next
evolution of what it means for humans to
interact in more healthy ways and with
curiosity and sense of invitation toward
more love connection and peace so you
know there really aren't words to
express um how enthusiastic and
appreciative I am of what you brought
here today and what you're doing and so
I just want to say you know the Deep
heartfelt thanks and I know I speak for
many many people thank you so much thank
you for joining me for today's
discussion about romantic relationships
with Esther Perell to find links to
Esther's new course on intimacy as well
as links to her books her podcast and
other resources please see the show note
captions if you're learning from and or
enjoying this podcast please subscribe
to our YouTube channel that's a terrific
zeroc cost way to support us in addition
please subscribe to the podcast on both
Spotify and apple and on both Spotify
and apple you can leave us up to a
five-star review please check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast if you
have questions for me or comments about
the podcast or guests or topics that
you'd like me to consider for the
huberman Lab podcast please put those in
the comment section on YouTube I do read
all the comments for those of you that
haven't heard I have a new book coming
out it's my very first book it's
entitled protocols an operating manual
for the human body this is a book that
I've been working on for more than 5
years and that's based on more than 30
years of research and experience and it
covers protocols for everything from
sleep to exercise to Stress Control
protocols related to focus and
motivation and of course I provide the
scientific substantiation for the
protocols that are included the book is
now available by pre-sale at protocols
book.com there you can find links to
various vendors you can pick the one
that you like best again the book is
called protocols an operating manual for
the human body if you're not already
following me on social media I am
huberman lab on all social media
platforms so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter threads Facebook and
Linkedin and on all those platforms I
discuss science and science related
tools some of which overlaps with the
content of the hubman Lab podcast but
much of which is distinct from the
content on the hubman Lab podcast again
that's hubman lab on all social media
channels if you haven't already
subscribed to our neural network
newsletter our neural Network newsletter
is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that
includes podcast summaries as well as
protocols in the form of brief 1 to
three page PDFs those protocol PDFs are
on things like neuroplasticity and
learning optimizing dopamine improving
your sleep deliberate cold exposure
deliberate heat exposure we have a
foundational Fitness protocol that
describes a template routine that
includes cardiovascular training and
resistance training with sets and Reps
all backed by science and all of which
again is completely zero cost to
subscribe simply go go to hubman lab.com
go to the menu tab up in the upper right
corner scroll down a newsletter and
provide your email and I should
emphasize that we do not share your
email with anybody thank you once again
for joining me for today's discussion
with Esther Perell and last but
certainly not least thank you for your
interest in science
[Music]