welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Terry
snowski Dr Terry snowski is a professor
at the sulk Institute for biological
studies where he directs the
computational neurobiology laboratory
and as his title suggests he is a
computational neuroscientist that is he
uses math as well as artificial
intelligence and Computing methods to
understand this overarching Ultra
important question of how the brain
works now I realize that when people
hear terms like computational
Neuroscience algorithms large language
models and AI that it can be a bit
overwhelming and even intimidating but I
assure you that the purpose of Dr sow's
work and indeed today's discussion is
all about using those methods to clarify
how the brain works and indeed to
simplify the answer to that question
so for instance today you will learn
that regardless of who you are
regardless of your experience that all
your motivation in all domains of life
is governed by a simple algorithm or
equation Dr snowski explains how a
single rule a single learning rule
drives all of our motivation related
behaviors and it of course relates to
the neurom modulator dopamine and if
you're familiar with dopamine as a term
today you will really understand how
dopamine Works to drive your levels of
motivation or in some cases lack of
motivation and how to overcome that lack
of motivation today we also discuss how
best to learn Dr sinowski shares not
just information about how the brain
works but also practical tools that he
and colleagues have developed including
a zeroc cost online portal that teaches
you how to learn better based on your
particular learning style the way that
you in particular Forge for information
and Implement that information Dr
snowski also explains how he himself
uses physical exercise of a particular
type in order to enhance his cognition
that is his brain's ability to learn
information and to come up with new
ideas today we also discuss both the
healthy brain and the diseased brain in
conditions like Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's and how particular tools
that relate to mitochondrial function
can perhaps be used in order to treat
various diseases including Alzheimer's
dementia I'm certain that by the end of
today's episode you will have learned a
tremendous amount of new knowledge about
how your brain works and practical tools
that you can Implement in your daily
life before we begin I'd like to
emphasize that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at
Stanford it is however part of my desire
and effort to bring zero cost to
Consumer information about science and
science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is betterhelp
better help offers Professional Therapy
with a licensed therapist carried out
completely online I've been doing weekly
therapy for well over 30 years and
initially I didn't have a choice it was
a condition of being allowed to stay in
school but pretty soon I realized that
therapy is an extremely important
component to one's overall health in
fact I consider doing regular therapy
just as important as getting regular
exercise including cardiovascular
exercise and resistance training which
of course I also do every single week
now there are essentially three things
that great therapy provides first of all
it provides a good rapport with somebody
that you can trust and talk to about
essentially all issues that you want to
second of all great therapy provides
support in the form of emotional support
or simply directed guidance what to do
or what not to do in given areas of your
life and third expert therapy can
provide you useful insights that you
would not have been able to arrive at on
your own better help makes it very easy
to find an expert therapist who you
really resonate with and that can
provide you the benefits I just
mentioned that come with effective
therapy if you'd like to try betterhelp
go to betterhelp.com huberman to get 10%
off your first month again that's
betterhelp.com huberman today's episode
is also brought To Us by Helix sleep
Helix sleep makes mattresses and pillows
that are customized to your unique sleep
needs now I've spoken many times before
on this and other podcast about the fact
that getting a great night's sleep is
the foundation of mental health physical
health and performance now the mattress
you sleep on makes a huge difference in
terms of the quality of sleep that you
get each night how soft it is or how
firm it is how breathable it is all play
into your comfort and need to be
tailored to your unique sleep needs if
you go to the Helix website you can take
a brief two-minute quiz and it asks you
questions such as do you sleep on your
back your side or your stomach do you
tend to run hot or cold during the night
things of that sort maybe you know the
answers to those questions maybe you
don't either way Helix will match you to
the ideal mattress for you for me that
turned out to be the dusk mattress the
US I started sleeping on a dusk mattress
about 3 and a half years ago and it's
been Far and Away the best sleep that
I've ever had if you'd like to try Helix
you can go to helixsleep.com
huberman take that two-minute sleep quiz
and Helix will match you to a match that
is customized for your unique sleep
needs for the month of November 2024
Helix is giving up to 25% off on all
mattress orders and two free pillows
again that's helixsleep.com
huberman to get up to 25% off and two
free pillows and now for my discussion
with Dr Terry sinowski Dr Terry sinowski
welcome great to be here we go way back
and I'm a huge huge fan of your work
because you've worked on a great many
different things in the field of
Neuroscience you're considered by many a
computational neuroscience so you bring
mathematical models to an understanding
of the brain and neural networks and
we're also going to talk about AI today
and we're going to make it accessible
for everybody biologist or no math
background or no to kick things off I
want to understand
something I understand a bit about the
parts list of the brain and most
listeners of this podcast will
understand a little bit of the parts
list of the brain even if they've never
heard an episode of this podcast before
because they understand there are cells
those cells are neurons those neurons
connect to one another in very specific
ways that allow us to see to hear to
think Etc but I've come to the belief
that even if we know the parts list it
doesn't really inform us how the brain
works right this is the big question how
does the brain work what is
consciousness all of this
stuff so where and how does an
understanding of how neurons talk to one
another start to give us a real
understanding about like how the brain
works like what is this piece of meat in
our heads because it can't just be okay
the hippocampus remembers stuff and the
you know the visual cortex perceives
stuff when you sit back and you remove
the math from the mental conversation if
that's possible for
you how do you think about quote unquote
how the brain works like at a very basic
level what is this piece of meat in our
heads really trying to accomplish
from let's just say the time when we
first wake up in the morning and we're a
little groggy till we make it to that
first cup of coffee or water or maybe
even just to urinate first thing in the
morning what is going on in there what a
great question and
um you you know the I have a u Pat
church and I wrote a book computational
Brain and in it there's this levels
diagram uh and it at levels of
Investigation at different spatial
scales from molecular at the very bottom
to synapses and neurons circuits neural
circuits how they're connected with each
other and then brain areas in the cortex
and then the whole central nervous
system span 10 orders of magnitude you
know 10th to the 10th in spatial scale
so you know where is consciousness in
all of that so uh there are two
approaches that neuroscientists have
taken
uh I shouldn't say neuroscientist I
should say that scientist had taken uh
and the one you describe which is you
know let's look at all the parts that's
the bottomup approach you know take it
apart and reductionist approach and you
make a lot of progress you can figure
out you know how things are connected
and and understand how development Works
how neurons connect but it's very
difficult to really make progress
because uh you quickly you get lost in
the
forest now the other approach which has
been successful um but at the end
unsatisfying is the top down approach
and and this is the approach that
psychologists have taken looking at
behavior and trying to understand you
know the the the the laws of behavior
this is the
behaviorists uh but you know even people
in AI were trying to do a top down to
write programs that could replicate
human behavior intelligent Behavior
and I have to say that both of those
approaches you know bottom up or top
down have really not gotten to the core
of answering any of those questions the
big questions but there's a whole new
approach now that is emerging in both
neuroscience and AI at exactly the same
time at this moment in history it's
really quite
remarkable so there's an intermediate
level between the implementation level
at the bottom how you implement some
particular uh
mechanism uh and the the the actual
behavior of the whole system is called
the
algorithmic level it's in between so
algorithms are like recipes they're like
you know when you bake a cake you have
to have uh ingredients and you have to
say how the order in which they're put
together and how long and you know if
you if you if you get it wrong you know
it doesn't work you know the the it's
just a mess
now it turns out that we're discovering
algorithms we've made a lot of progress
with understanding the algorithms that
are used in neural circuits and this U
speaks to the computational level of of
how to understand you know the function
of the neural circuit but uh I'm going
to give you one example of an
algorithm which uh is is one we worked
on back in the 1990s when um Peter de
and Reed monu or postto in the lab and
it had to do with a part of the brain
below the cortex called the basal
ganglia which is responsible for
learning sequences of actions in order
to achieve some goal for example if you
want to play tennis you know you have to
be able to coordinate many muscles and a
whole sequence of actions has to be made
if you want to be able to serve
accurately and you have to practice
practice practice well what's going on
there is that the basil ganglia
basically is taking over from the cortex
and producing actions that get better
and better and better and better and
that's true not just of the the muscles
but it's also true of thinking if you
want to become good in any area if you
want to become a a good uh Finance here
if you want to get become a good
doctor or a neuroscientist right you you
you have to be uh practicing practicing
practic iing in terms of understanding
what uh you know what what's uh the
details of the profession and what works
what doesn't work and so forth and and
it turns out that the basal ganglia
interacts with the cortex not just in
the back which is the action part but
also with the prefrontal cortex which is
the thinking part can I ask you a
question about this briefly the basil
ganglia as I understand are involved in
the um organization of two major types
of behaviors go meaning to actually
perform a behavior but the basil ganglia
also instruct noo don't don't engage in
that behavior and learning a an expert
golf swing or even a basic golf swing or
tennis racket swing involves both of
those things go and no- go given what
you just said which is that the basil
ganglia are also involved
in generating thoughts of particular
kinds I wonder therefore if it's also
involved in suppression of thoughts of
particular kinds I mean you don't want
your surgeon cutting into um you know a
particular uh region and just thinking
about their motor behaviors what to do
and what not to do they presumably need
to think about what to think about but
also what to not think about you don't
want that um surgeon thinking about how
their kid was a brat that morning and um
and they're frustrated because the two
things interact so is there go no- go in
terms of action and learning and is
there go noo in terms of thinking well I
mentioned the prefontal cortex and that
part the loop with the basil G
that is one of the last to mature in uh
you know early adulthood and you know
what the problem is that for adolescence
it's not the no-go part for for you know
planning and actions isn't quite there
yet and so often it doesn't kick in to
to prevent you from doing things that
are not in your best interest so yes
absolutely right but one of the things
though is that learning is involved and
and this is really so a problem that we
cracked
first theoretically in the 90s and then
experimentally later by recording from
neurons and also brain Imaging in humans
so it turns out we know the algorithm
that is used in the brain for how to
learn sequences of actions to achieve a
goal uh and and it's a simplest possible
algorithm you can imagine it's simply to
predict the next reward you're going to
get if I if I do an action well I will
it be a give me something of
value and uh and you learn every time
you try something whether you got the
amount of reward you expected or less
you use that to update the synapses
synaptic plasticity so that the next
time you'll have a better chance of
getting a a better reward and you build
up what's called a value function so the
cortex now over your lifetime is
building up a a lot of knowledge about
you know things that are good for you
things that are bad for you like you go
to a restaurant you order something how
do you know what's good for you right
you've had lots of meals in a lot of
places and now that is part of your
value
function this is the same algorithm that
was used by Alpha go this is the program
that deep mine built this is an AI
program that beat the world go champion
and go is the most complex game that
humans have ever come uh played you know
on a regular basis far more complex than
chess as I understand yeah that's right
so uh go is to chess where chess is to
something like Che Checkers you know
other words the level of difficulty is
another you way off above it because you
have to think in terms of of of battles
going on all over the place at the same
time and the order in which you put the
pieces down are going to affect what's
going to happen in the
future so this value function is super
interesting and I wonder whether and I
think answer this but I wonder whether
this value function is implemented over
long periods of time so you talked about
the value function in terms of learning
a motor skill let's say swinging a
tennis racket to do a perfect tennis
surf or or even just a decent tennis
surf when somebody goes back to the
court let's say on the weekend once a
month over the course of years are they
able to tap into that same value
function every time they go back even
though there's been a lot of intervening
time and learning that's question number
one and then the other question is do
you think that this value function is
also being played out in more complex
scenarios not just motor learning such
as let's say a domain of life that for
many people involves some um trial and
error it would be like human
relationships we learn how to be friends
with people uh we learn how to be a good
sibling uh we learn how to be a good
romantic partner right we get some
things right we get some things wrong so
is the same value function being
implemented we're paying attention to
what was rewarding but what I didn't
hear you say also was what was punishing
so are we only paying attention to what
is rewarding or we're also integrating
punishment we don't get an electric
shock when we get the serve wrong but we
can be frustrated what you identified is
um some a very uh important feature uh
which is that rewards uh by the way you
know every time you do something you're
updating this value function every time
and and it accumulates and the answer to
your first question the answer is that
it's always going to be there it doesn't
matter it's it's a very permanent part
of
your experience and who you
are and uh and interestingly and and the
behaviorist knew this back in the 1950s
that uh you can get there two ways of
trial and error you know small rewards
are good because you're constantly
coming closer and closer to getting the
uh what you're seeking better tennis
player or being able to make a
friend
but the
negative punishment is much more
effective one trial
learning you don't need to have you know
100 trials to you know what you need you
know when you're training a rat to to do
some task with small food rewards but if
you if you just shock the rat boy that
rat doesn't forget that yeah one really
bad relationship will have you have you
learning certain things forever and this
is also PTSD post-traumatic stress
disorder is is another good example of
that that can screw you up for the rest
of your life so so but the other thing
and and you you pointed out something
really important which is that a large
part of the prefrontal cortex is devoted
to social interaction
and this is how humans you know when you
come into the world you don't know what
language you're going to be speaking you
don't know what the cultural values are
that you're that you're going to have to
be able to become a member of this
society and things that are expected of
you all of that has to become through
experience through building this value
function so this is and this is
something we discovered in the 20th
century and and now it's going into AI
it's called reinforcement learning in AI
it's a it's a form of procceed ual
learning as opposed to the cognitive
level where you think and you do things
cognitive thinking is much less
efficient uh because you have to go step
by step with procedural learning uh it's
automatic can you give me an example of
procedural learning in the context of um
a comparison to cognitive learning like
is there an example of perhaps like how
to make a decent cup of coffee using uh
you know purely knowledge-based
learning versus procedural learning
where procedural learning wins and I I I
can imagine one but you're the true
expert here well you know no you know a
lot of examples but uh my my just since
we've been talking about tennis can you
imagine learning how to play tennis
through a book reading a book that's so
funny on the plane back from Nashville
yesterday the guy sitting across the
aisle from me was reading a book about
um uh maybe he was working on his
pilot's license or something and I I
looked over and couldn't but notice
these diagrams of the of the plane
flying and I thought I'm just so glad
that this guy is a passenger and not and
not a pilot and then I thought about how
the pilots learned and presumably it was
a combination of practical learning and
textbook learning I me when you scuba
dive this is true I'm scuba dive
certified and when you get your
certification you you learn your dive
tables and you learn why you have to
wait between Dives Etc and gas exchange
and a number of things
but there's really no way to simulate
what is to take your mask off underwater
put it back on and then you know blow
the water out of your mask like that you
just have to do that in a pool and you
actually have to do it when you need to
for it to really get drilled in yes you
you you you you uh it's really essential
for things that uh have to be executed
quickly and and uh expertly to to get
that you know really down path so you
don't have to
think uh
and this happens in school right in
other words you you you you have
classroom lessons where you're given
explicit instruction but then you go do
homework that's procedural learning you
do problems you solve problems and and
you know I'm I'm a PhD physicist so I I
I went through all of the classes you
know in theoretical physics and um it
was really the problems that really were
the core of becoming a good physicist
you know you can memorize the equations
but that doesn't mean you understand how
to use the equations I think it's worth
highlighting something a lot of times on
this podcast we talk about what I call
protocols it would be you know like get
some morning sunlight in your eyes to
stimulate your supermatic nucleus by way
of your retinal gangling cells audiences
of this podcast will recognize those
terms it's basically get sunlight in
your eyes in the morning and set your
circadian clock that's right and you can
hear that a trillion times but I do
believe that there's some value to both
knowing what the protocol is the
underlying mechanisms there are these
things in your eye that you know encode
the sunrise qualities of light it's Etc
and then send them to your brain etc etc
but then once we link knowledge pure
knowledge to a practice I do believe
that the two things merge someplace in a
way that um let's say reinforces both
the knowledge and the practice right so
these things are not necessarily
separate they bridge in other words
doing your theoretical physics uh
problem sets reinforces the examples
that you learned in lecture and in your
textbooks and vice versa so this is a
battle that's going on right now in
schools uh you're you know what you've
just said is absolutely right you need
both we have two major Learning Systems
we have a cognitive learning system
which is cortical we have a procedural
learning system which is subcortical
basil
gangli and the two go hand in hand if
you want to become good at anything that
the two are going to help each other and
what's going on right now in schools in
California at least is that they're
trying to get rid of the procedural
that's ridiculous they don't want
students to practice because it it's
it's going to be uh you know you're
you're stressing them that you don't
want them to be to feel that you know
that they're having difficulty so but we
can but for those listening I'm covering
my eyes because I mean this would this
would be like saying um goodness there's
so many examples like here's a textbook
on swimming and then you're you're going
to go out to the ocean someday and you
will have never actually swam right and
now you're expected to be able to
survive let alone swim well it's crazy
it's crazy but I'll tell you Barbara
Oakley um has uh and I have a a moo
massive open online course on learning
how to learn and it helps students we
aimed it at students but it actually has
been taken by four million people in 200
countries ages 10 to 90 what is this
called learning how to learn is it uh is
there a pay wall no it's free completely
free amazing and uh and you know I get
incredible you know feedback uh you know
faman letters almost every day well
you're about to get a few more okay I
did an episode on learning how to learn
and my understanding of the research is
that we need to test ourselves on the
material the testing is not just a form
of evaluation it is a form of uh
identifying the the errors that help us
then compensate for the errors and learn
but it but it's it's very procedural
it's not about just listen and
regurgitating you you're you know you
put your finger on it which is that and
this is what we teach the students is
that you have to uh there there the the
way the brain works right is is not it
doesn't memorize things like a
computer but you you have to it has to
be active learning you have to actively
engage in fact um when you're you're
trying to solve a problem on your own
right this is where you're really
learning by trial and error and that's
procedural system if someone tells you
what the right answer is you know you
know that's just something that is a
fact that it gets stored away somewhere
but it's not going to automatically come
up if you actually are faced with
something that's not exactly the same
problem but it's similar and by the way
this is the key to AI completely uh
essential for the recent success of of
these uh large language models you know
that the public now is beginning to use
is that they're they're not parrots they
just they're not they just don't
memorize what they what they've the data
that they've taken
in they have to generalize that means to
be able to do well on new things that
come in that are similar to the old
things that you've seen But allow you to
solve new problems that's the key to the
brain that the brain is a really really
good at generalizing in fact in many
cases you only need one example to
generalize like going to a restaurant
for the first time there are a number of
new interactions right there might be a
host or a Hostess you sit down at these
tables you've never sat at somebody asks
you questions you read it okay maybe
it's a QR code these days but right um
Forever After you understand the process
of going into a restaurant doesn't
matter what the genre of food happens to
be or what city sitting inside or
outside you can pretty much work it out
sit at the counter sit outside sit at
the table it's there a number of key
action steps that I think pretty much
translate to everywhere unless you go to
some super high-end thing or some super
lowend thing where it's a buffet or
whatever you know you can start to fill
in the blanks here if I understand
correctly there's a an action function
that's
learned from the knowledge and the
experience exactly and then where is
that action function stored is it in one
location in the brain or is it kind of
an emergent property of multiple brain
areas so that you're right at the cusp
here of uh where we are in Neuroscience
right now we don't know the answer to
that question in the past it had been
thought that uh you know the the
cortex had uh were like uh countries on
uh uh that Each of which each part of
the cortex was dedicated to one function
right uh you know there and and
interestingly you record for the neurons
and it certainly looks that way right in
other words the there's a visual cortex
in the back and there's a whole series
of areas then there's the auditory
cortex in the here in the middle and
then the prefrontal cortex for social
interaction and and so it looked really
clearcut that it's modular and now we're
facing is by uh we have a new way to
record from neurons optically we can
record from tens of thousands from
dozens of areas simultaneously and what
we're discovering is that if you want to
do any task you're engaging not just the
area
that you might think you know has the
input coming in the visual system but
the visual system is getting input from
the motor system right in fact you know
there's more input coming from the motor
system than from the eye really yes yeah
an churchin at UCLA has shown that in
the mouse uh this is so now we're
looking at Global interactions between
all these areas and that's where real uh
complex cognitive behaviors emerge is
from those interactions and now we have
the tools for the first time to actually
be able to see them in real time and and
we're we're doing that now U First on uh
mice and monkeys but uh we now can do
this in humans so I've been
collaborating with a group at Mass
General Hospital to record from people
with epilepsy and and they have to have
an operation for people who are drug
resistant to be able to uh take out find
out where it starts in the cortex you
know and and where is initiated where
the seizure starts and then to go in you
have to go in and record simultaneously
from a lot of parts of the cortex for
weeks until you find out where it is and
then you go in and you try to uh take it
out and and often that helps very very
invasive but for two weeks we have
access to all those neurons in that
cortex that are being you know recorded
from constantly and so I've used I
started out because I was interested in
sleep and I wanted to understand what
happens in in the cortex of a human
during sleep but then we be realized
that you know you can also figure you
know people who have these debilitating
problems with
seizures you know they're there for two
weeks and they have nothing to do so
they just love the fact that scientists
are interested in helping them and and
you know teaching them things and
finding out where in the cortex uh
things are happening when they learn
something this is a gold mine it's it's
unbelievable and I I've I've learned
things from humans that could I could
have never gotten from any other species
amazing obviously language is one of
them but there are other things in sleep
that uh We've we discovered having to do
with traveling ways there are circular
traveling ways that go on during sleep
which is astonishing nobody ever really
uh saw that before but uh if you were to
ascribe one or two major functions to
these traveling waves what do you think
they are accomplishing for us in sleep
and by the way are they associated with
deep sleep slow wave sleep or with rapid
ey movement sleep or this is uh this is
uh non-rm sleep this is a jargon this is
uh during uh
intermediate transition States the
transition state okay our audience will
probably keep they've they've heard a
lot about slow wave sleep from me and
Matt Walker from Rapid ey light slow a
sleep yeah and so what do these
traveling waves accomplish for us okay
so in the case of the they're called
sleep spindles they last the waves last
for about u a second or two um and and
they travel like I say in a circle
around the cortex and it's known that
these spindles are important for
consolidating experiences you've had
during the day into your long-term
memory
storage so so it's a very important
function and if if if you take out see
it's the hippocampus that
is is is is replaying the experience is
it's a part of the brain is very
important for long-term memory if you
don't have a hippocampus you can't learn
new things that to say you can't
remember what you did the yesterday or
for that matter even an hour earlier but
the hippocampus plays back your
experiences causes the sleep spindles
now to knead that into the cortex and
and it you it's important you do that
right because you don't want to
overwrite the existing knowledge you
have you just want to basically
incorporate the new experience into your
exist existing knowledge base in an
efficient way that uh that doesn't
interfere with what you already know so
that's an example of of very important
function that these traveling wavs have
I'd like to take a quick break and
acknowledge our sponsor ag1 ag1 is a
vitamin mineral probiotic drink that
includes prebiotics and adaptogens I've
been drinking ag1 since 2012 and I
started doing at a time when my budget
was really Limited in fact I only had
enough money to purchase one supplement
and I'm so glad that I made that
supplement ag1 the reason for that is
even though I strive to eat Whole Foods
and unprocessed Foods it's very
difficult to get enough vitamins and
minerals micronutrients and adaptogens
from diet alone in order to make sure
that I'm at my best meaning have enough
energy for all the activities I
participate in from morning until night
sleeping well at night and keeping my
immune system strong when I take ag1
daily I find that all aspects of my
health my physical health my mental
health my performance recovery from
exercise all of those improve and I know
that because I've had lapses when I
didn't take my ag1 and I certainly felt
the difference I also noticed and this
makes perfect sense given the
relationship between the gut microbiome
and the brain that when I regularly take
ag1 that I have more mental Clarity and
more mental energy if you'd like to try
ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman
to claim a special offer for this month
only November 2024 ag1 is giving away a
free one-month supply of omega-3 fatty
acids from fish oil in addition to their
usual welcome kit of five free travel
packs and a year supply of vitamin D3 K2
as I've discussed many times before on
this podcast omega-3 fatty acids are
critical for brain health mood cognition
and more again go to drink a1.com
huberman to claim this special offer
today's episode is also brought To Us by
David David makes a protein bar unlike
any other it has 28 gram of protein only
150 calories and 0 gam of sugar that's
right 28 gr of protein and 75% of its
calories come from protein the These
Bars from David also taste amazing my
favorite flavor is chocolate chip cookie
dough but then again I also like the
chocolate fudge flavored one and I also
like the cake flavored one basically I
like all the flavors they're incredibly
delicious for me personally I strive to
eat mostly Whole Foods however when I'm
in a rush or I'm away from home or I'm
just looking for a quick afternoon snack
I often find that I'm looking for a
highquality protein source with David
I'm able to get 28 g of protein with the
calories of a snack which makes it very
easy to hit my protein goals of 1 gram
of protein per pound of body weight each
day and it allows me to do that without
taking in excess calories I typically
eat a David bar in the early afternoon
or even midafternoon if I want to bridge
that gap between lunch and dinner I like
that it's a little bit sweet so it
tastes like a tasty snack but it's also
giv me that 28 gram of very high quality
protein with just 150 calories if you
would like to try David you can go to
david.com huberman again the link is
david.com huberman as I call there are
one or two things that one can do in
order to ensure that one gets sufficient
sleep spindles at night and thereby
incorporate this new knowledge this was
from the episode that we did with Gina
Po from UCLA I believe and others
including Matt Walker my recollection is
that the number one thing is to make
sure you get enough sleep at night so
you experience enough of these spindles
and we're all familiar with the um
cognitive challenges including memory
challenges and learning challenges
associated with with lack of sleep
insufficient sleep but the other was
that um there was some interesting
relationship between daytime exercise
and nighttime prevalence of sleep
spindles are you familiar with that
literature oh yes no this is a this is a
fascinating
literature uh and it's all pointing the
same direction which is that you know we
always neglect
to uh appreciate the importance of sleep
I mean obviously you're refreshed when
you wake up but there's a lot of things
happen it's not that your brain turns
off it's that it goes into a completely
different state and and memory
consolidation is just one of those
things that happens when you're fall
asleep and of course you you know
there's dreams and so forth we don't
fully appreciate or understand exactly
how all the different sleep stages are
are uh work together but uh exercis is a
particularly
important part of of of getting uh the
motor uh system
uh uh tuned up and and that it's thought
that the uh this the REM rapid eye
movement sleep may be involved in that
so that that's a that's yet another part
of the Sleep uh stages you go through
you go back and forth between um dream
sleep and the slow way sleep back and
forth back and forth during the night
and then at the when you wake up you're
in the in the REM stage more and more
REM more and more REM but you know
that's all observation
but we you know as a scientist what you
want to do is perturb the system and and
see if you can maybe if you had more
sleep spindles maybe you'd be able to
remember things better so it turns out
Sarah mednick who was at UC Irvine did
this fantastic experiment so it turns
out there's a drug called
zulum which um is is goes by the the
name ambian you may have some experience
with that if I've never taken it but um
I'm I'm aware of what is people use it
as a sleep aid that's right it's it's it
a lot of people take it in order to
sleep
okay uh well it turns out that it causes
uh more sleep spindles really yeah it it
doubles the number of sleep spindles if
you you know if you take the drug uh you
take the drug
uh after you've done the learning right
you do the learning at night and then
you take the drug and you have twice as
many spindles you wake up in the morning
you can remember twice as much from what
you learned and the memories are stable
over time it's like it's in there yes
yeah no it's it's it it it consolidates
it I mean that's the point is what's the
downside of ambient okay here's the
downside okay so people who take the
drug say if you're going uh to Europe
and you take it and then you sleep
really soundly but often
you you find yourself in the hotel room
and you completely have no clue you have
no memory of how you got there had that
experience without ambian or any other
drugs where I am very badly jetlagged
yes and I wake up and for a few seconds
but what feels like eternity I have no
idea where I am okay it's terrifying
that well that that's another problem
that you have with jet lag jet lag
really screws things up but this is
something where it could be an hour you
know you you you took the train or you
you took a taxi or something and you're
and so here here now this seems crazy
how could it be a a way to improve
learning and recall on one hand and then
forgetfulness on the other hand well it
turns out what's important
is um that when you take the drug right
uh in other words it helps consolidate
experiences you've had in the past
before you took the drug but it will
wipe out experiences you have in the
future after you take the drug right
yeah you Ste sorry I'm not laughing it
must be a terrifying experience but I'm
laughing because you know there's some
beautiful pharmacology and indeed some
um wonderfully useful uh Pharmaceuticals
out there uh you know some people may
cringe to hear me say that but there are
some very useful drugs out there that
save lives and help people deal with
symptoms Etc um side effects are always
a concern but this particular drug
profile
ambian that is
um seems to reveal something perhaps
even more important than discussion
about spindles or ambient or even sleep
which is that you got to pay the piper
somehow as they say that's right that
you tweak one thing in the brain
something else uh something else goes
you you you don't get anything for
free
that's a TR I think that this is
something that uh is true not just of
drugs for the brain but steroids for the
body right sure yeah I mean steroids um
even lowd dose testosterone therapy
which is very popular nowadays um will
give people more Vigor Etc but it is
introducing a sort of um second puberty
and puberty is perhaps the most rapid
phase of Aging in the entire lifespan
same thing with people take growth
hormone would be probably a better
example because certainly those
therapies can be beneficial to people
but growth hormone gives people more
Vigor but it accelerates aging look at
the quality of skin that people have
when they take growth hormone it looks
more aged they physically change and I'm
not for or against these things it's
highly individual but I completely agree
with you I I would also Venture that um
with the growing interest in um
so-called neut tropics and people taking
things like modafanil not just for
narcolepsy daytime sleepiness but also
to enhance cognitive function okay maybe
they can get away with doing that every
once in a while for a a deadline task or
something but my experience is that
people who obsess over the use of
pharmacology to achieve certain brain
States pay in some other way absolutely
whether or not stimulants or sedatives
or sleep drugs and that behaviors will
always Prevail behaviors will always
Prevail as tools yeah and and uh the one
of the things about the way the body
evolved is that it's it's it really has
to balance a lot of things and so with
drugs you're basically unbalancing it
somehow and and and the consequence is
as you point out is that you know what
what in order to make uh one part better
one part of your body or you you
sacrifice something else somewhere else
as long as we're talking about brain
States and um connectivity across areas
um I want to ask a particular question
then I want to return to this issue
about how best to learn especially in
kids but also in adulthood um I've
become very interested in and spent a
lot of time with the literature and some
guests on the topic of
psychedelics um let's leave the
discussion about LSD aside because do
you know why there aren't many studies
of LSD this is kind of a fun one no one
is expected to know against the law I
think oh but there's so is sosy in her
MDMA and there are lots of studies going
on about those yeah changed but when I
was growing up you know as you know it
was against the law right so that what I
learned is that the that there are far
fewer clinical trials exploring the use
of LSD as a therapeutic because with the
exception of Switzerland none of the
researchers are willing to stay in the
laboratory as long as it takes for the
subject to get through an LSD Journey
whereas psilocybin tends to be a shorter
a shorter experience okay let's talk
about psilocybin from a moment my read
of the data on psilocybin is that it's
still open to question but that some of
the clinical trials show pretty
significant recovery from major
depression is pretty impressive but if
we just set that aside and say okay more
needs to be worked out for safety what
is very clear from the brain Imaging
studies that sort before and after
resting state task related Etc is that
you get more resting State Global
connectivity more areas talking to more
areas than was the case prior to the use
of the Psychedelic and given the
similarity of the Psychedelic journey
and here specifically talking about
psilocybin to things like rapid eye
movement sleep and things of that
sort I have a very simple question do
you think that there's any real benefit
to increasing brainwide connectivity to
me it seems a little bit halfhazard and
yet the clinical data are promising if
nothing else promising and so is what
we're seeking in life as we acquire new
knowledge as we learn tennis or golf or
you know take up singing or what have
you as we go from childhood into the
late stages of our life that whole
transition is what we're doing
increasing connectivity and
communication between different brain
areas is that what the Human Experience
is really about or is it that we're
getting more modular we're getting more
segregated in terms of this area talking
to this area in this particular way um
feel free to explore this in any way
that feels meaningful or to say pass if
it's not a good question no it's a great
question I mean you have all these great
questions and we don't have complete
answers yet but uh specifically with
regard to connectivity um if you look at
what happens in an infant's brain during
the first two years there's a tremendous
amount of new synapses being formed this
is your area by the way you know more
about this than I do yeah that's true
but then you prune them right there's
then the second phase is that you over
abundant synapses and now what you want
to do is to prune them why would you
want to do that
well you know synapses are expensive
it's talk takes a lot of uh of energy to
activate all of the neurons and the
synapses especially because there's the
turnover of the
neurotransmitter and so what you want to
do is to uh reduce the amount of energy
and only use those synapses that have
been proven to be the most important
right now unfortunately as you get
older you you have the pruning slows
down but doesn't go away so the cortex
Thins and and so forth so I think it's
goes in the opposite direction I think
that as you get older you you you're
losing
connectivity but you you retain
interestingly you retain the old
memories the old memories are are really
rock solid because they were put in when
you were young yeah the foundation the
foundation upon which everything else is
built uh but but it's not totally uh one
way in in the sense that even as an
adult as you know you can learn new
things maybe not as quickly by the way
uh this is one of the things that
surprised me so Barbara and I have you
know looked at the people who you know
really were benefited the most it turns
out that the peak of the demographic is
25 to 35 Barbara Oakley Oakley yeah
she's she's she's really The Mastermind
she's a fabulous uh educator and and uh
background in
engineering but what's going on so it
turns out we we aimed our uh uh our Muk
at kids in high school and college
because that's their business they go
every day and they go into work and they
have to learn right that's their
business but in fact very very few uh of
of the students are actually uh you know
they weren't taking the C why should
they they they spend all day in the
class right why do they want to take
another class so this is the your um the
the learning to learn class learning how
to learn okay so you did this with
Barbara so we did this I did with
Barbara and now 25 to 35 we have this
huge Peak huge so what's going on here's
what's going on it's very interesting so
you're 25 youve gone to college half the
People by the way who take the course
went to college right so this it's not
like you know filling in for college
this is like topping it
off but you're in a Workforce you have
to learn new skill may maybe you have
mortgage maybe you have children right
you can't afford to to go go off and and
and and take a course of
in get another degree so you take a moo
and you discover you know I'm not quite
as agile as I used to be in terms of
learning but it turns out with our
course you can boost your learning and
so that even though you're not as your
your brain is isn't learning as quickly
you can do it more efficiently this is
amazing I I want to take this course um
I will take this course what um what
sort of time commitment is the course
you already point out that it's zero
cost which is amazing yeah yeah okay so
uh it it's bite-sized videos lasting
about 10 minutes each and there's about
50 or 60 over the course of one month
and are you tested are you self test
yeah there there are tests there are
quizzes there are tests at the end and
there are uh forums where you can go and
talk to other students you have
questions we have Tas know it's and
anyone can do this anyone in the world
in fact we have people in India
Housewives who say thank you thank you
thank you because I could have never
learned about how to how to be a better
learner and I wish I had known this when
I was going to school why do more people
not know about this learning to learn
course although you as people know if I
get really excited about it or about
anything I'm I'm never going to shut up
about it but I'm going to take the
course first because I want to
understand the gut you you'll enjoy it
uh we we have like 98% approval which is
phenomenal it's it's sticky lot is is it
math vocabulary no math no vo it's not
we're not teaching anything specific
we're not te we're not trying to give
you knowledge we're trying to tell you
how to acquire knowledge and how to do
that how to how to deal with exam
anxiety for example or how to how to uh
you know we all procrastinate right we
we put things off well n no I'm kidding
we all procrastinate how to avoid that
we we we teach you how to avoid that
fantastic okay I'm going to skip back a
little bit now with the intention of of
double clicking on this learning to
learn thing you pointed out that in
particular in California but elsewhere
as well um there isn't as much
procedural practice based learning
anymore um I'm going to play devil's
advocate here uh and I'm going to point
out that this is not what I actually
believe but you know when I was growing
up you had to do your times tables and
your Division and you know and then your
fractions and your exponents and you
know and you they build on one another
um and then at some point you know you
take courses where you might need it
like a graphing calculator to some
people they going be like what what is
this but the point being that there were
a number of things that you had to learn
to implement functions and and you learn
you learn by doing you learn by doing um
likewise in in physics class we you know
we were attaching things to Strings and
for macr mechanics and and learning that
stuff okay um and learning from the
chalkboard uh
lectures I can see the value of both
certainly and you explained that the
brain needs both to really understand
knowledge and how to implement and back
and forth but noways you know you'll
hear the argument well why should
somebody learn how to read a paper map
unless it's the only thing available
because you have Google Maps or if they
want to do a calculation they just put
it into the top bar function on the
internet and boom out comes the answer
so there is a world where certain skills
are no longer
required and one could argue
that the brain space and activity and
time and energy in particular could be
devoted to learning new forms of
knowledge that are going to be more
practical in the school and Workforce
going forward so how do we reconcile
these things I mean I'm of the belief
that the brain is doing math and you and
I agree it's electrical signals and
chemical signals and it's doing math and
it's running algorithms I think you
convinced us of that um certainly
but how are we to discern what we need
to learn versus what we don't need to
learn in terms of building a brain
that's capable of learning the maximum
number of things or even enough things
so that we can go into into this very
uncertain future because as far as you
know and I know there's no neither of us
have a crystal ball so what is essential
to learn and for those of us that didn't
learn certain things in our formal
education what should we learn how to
learn
well uh this is uh
generational
okay
so Technologies provide us with tools
you mentioned the calcul calcor
right uh well a calculator didn't
eliminate uh you know the education you
need to get in math but it made certain
things easier it SP it made it possible
for you to do more things and more
accurately however interestingly uh
students in my class often uh come up
with answers that are off by you know
eight orders of magnitude then that if
that's a huge amount right it's clear
that they didn't key in the calculator
properly
but they didn't recognize that it was it
was a very far it was completely way off
the beam because they didn't have a good
feeling for the numbers they don't have
a good sense of you know exactly how big
it should have been you know order of
magnitude basic you know understanding
so it's it's kind of a there there's a
the benefit is that you can do things
faster better but then you also lose
some of your intuition if if you don't
have the procedural system in place I'm
thinking about a kid that wants to be a
musician who uses AI to write a song
about a bad
breakup that then is kind of recovered
when they find new Love and I'm guessing
that you could do this today and get a
pretty good song out of AI but would you
call that kid a songwriter or a musician
on the face of it yeah the AI is helping
and then you'd say well that's not the
same as sitting down with a guitar and
trying out different chords and and
feeling the intonation in their voice
but I'm guessing that for people that
were on the electric guitar they were
criticizing people on the acoustic
guitar you know so we have this
generational thing where we look back
and say that's not the real thing you
need to get the so what what are the key
fundamentals is really a critical
question okay so I'm gonna come back to
that because this is how the way you put
it at the beginning had had to do with
uh whether your how your brain is
allocating resources Okay so
when you're younger you can take in
things your brain is more malleable for
example
uh how good are you on social
media I well I do all my own Instagram
and Twitter and those accounts have
grown in proportion to the amount of
time I've been doing it so yeah I would
say pretty good I mean I'm I I'm not the
biggest account on social media but for
a science health account we we're doing
okay um thanks to the audience well well
well this speaks well for the fact that
you've uh managed to uh break you know
to go beyond the generation gap because
I can type with my thumbs Terry okay
there you go that's a manual skill that
you learn new new uh new phenomenon in
human evolution I I couldn't believe it
I saw people doing that and now I can do
it too but uh but the thing is that if
you learn how to do that early in life
you're much more uh good at it you you
can you move your thumbs much more
quickly also uh you can have many more
you know tweets go and not what are they
called now they're not called tweets on
X I think they still call them tweets
because you can't it's hard to verb the
the the letter X Elon didn't think of
that one I like X because it's cool it's
kind of punk and it's got black black uh
kind of format and it fits with kind of
the the the the you know the engineer
like black X you know and this kind of
thing but yeah we'll still call them
tweets well okay we'll call them tweets
okay that's that's good but you know I I
I walk across campus and I see everybody
like half the people are are Tweeting or
you know they're they're doing something
with their cell phone they're I mean
it's unbelievable you have beautiful
sunsets at the Suk Institute we'll put a
link to one of them I mean it is it is
truly spectacular awe inspiring to see a
sunset at the Sal Institute every day is
different and everyone's on their phones
these days sad and and you they're
looking down at their phone and they
walking along even people who are
skateboarding unbelievable I mean you
know it's amazing what the human being
can do you know when they learn to get
into something but what happens is
younger generation picks up whatever
technology it is and the brain gets
really good at it and you Pi can pick it
up later but you know not quite as agile
not quite as uh maybe obsessive it
fatigues me I will point this out that
doing so doing anything on my phone
feels fatiguing in a way that reading a
A paperbook or even just writing on a
laptop or a desktop computer is
fundamentally different I can do that
from many hours if I'm on social media
for more than few minutes I can
literally feel the energy draining out
of my body interesting I would I could
do um Sprints or deadlifts for hours and
not feel the kind of fatigue that I feel
from doing social media so you know this
is fascinating I I like to know what's
going on in your brain why why is it and
and also I'd like to know from younger
people whether they have the same I
think not I think my guess is that they
don't feel fatigued because they got
into this early enough uh and this is
actually uh a very very
uh I I think that has a lot to do with
the foundation you put into your brain
in other words things that you that you
get you learn when you're really young
are foundational and they make things
easier some things easier yeah I spent a
lot of time in my room as a kid either
playing with Legos or action figures or
building fish tanks or reading about
fish I would I tended to read about
things and then do a lot of procedural
based uh activities you know I read
skateboard magazines and skateboard I I
was never one to really just watch a
sport and not play it so that you know
bridging across these things so social
media to me feels like an energy sync
but of course I love the opportunity to
be able to teach to people and learn
from people at such scale but at an
energetic level I I feel like I don't
have a foundation for it it's like I'm
trying to like like Jerry rig my
cognition into doing something that it
wasn't designed to do well there you go
and it's because you don't have the
Foundation you didn't do it when you
were younger and now you have to sort of
use the the cognitive powers to do a lot
of what was being done now in a younger
person procedurally I'd like to take a
quick break and thank one of our
sponsors element element is an
electrolyte drink that has everything
you need and nothing you don't that
means the electrolytes sodium magnesium
and potassium in the correct ratios but
no sugar we should all know that proper
hydration is critical for optimal brain
and body function in fact even a slight
degree of dehydration can diminish your
cognitive and physical performance to a
considerable degree it's also important
that you're not just hydrated but that
you get adequate amounts of electrolytes
in the right ratios drinking a packet of
element dissolved in water makes it very
easy to ensure that you're getting
adequate amounts of hydration and
electrolytes to make sure that I'm
getting proper amounts of both I
dissolve one packet of element in about
16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up
in the morning and I drink that
basically first thing in the morning
I'll also drink a packet of element
dissolved in water during any kind of
physical exercise that I'm doing
especially on hot days when I'm sweating
a lot and losing water and electrolytes
there are a bunch of different great
tasting flavors of element I like the
watermelon I like the raspberry I like
the Citrus basically I like all of them
if you'd like to try element you can go
to drink element.com huberman to claim
an element sample pack with the purchase
of any element drink mix again that's
drink element spelled l m NT so it's
drink element.com huberman to claim a
free sample pack today's episode is also
brought To Us by Jude
ju makes medical grade red light therapy
devices now if there's one thing that
I've consistently emphasized on this
podcast is the incredible impact that
light can have on our biology now in
addition to sunlight red light and near
infrared light have been shown to have
positive effects on improving numerous
aspects of cellular and organ Health
including faster Muscle Recovery improv
skin health and wound healing
improvements in acne reduced pain and
inflammation improved mitochondrial
function and even improving Vision
itself now what sets juv lights apart
and why they're my preferred red light
therapy devices is that they use
clinically proven wavelengths meaning
they use specific wav Lance of red light
and near infrared light in combination
to trigger the optimal cellular
adaptations personally I use the ju
whole body panel about three to four
times a week and I use the juv handheld
light both at home and when I travel if
you'd like to try ju you can go to ju
spelled
jv.com huberman ju is offering Black
Friday discounts of up to $1,300 now
through December 2nd 2024 again that's
ju
jv.com huberman to get up to $300 off
select ju products I'm going to tell you
something which is going to help all of
your listeners my book uh chat GDP in
the future of AI I went through and I
looked at other people's experiences
with chat GDP I just wanted to know what
what people were thinking and what and I
came across it was an article on I think
it was the New York Times of a technical
writer who decided she would spend one
month using it to help her write things
her articles and she said that when she
started out you know at the end of the
day she was
drained completely drained and it was
like you know working on a machine you
know like a tractor or something you
know he struggling struggling struggling
to get it to
work and then she started said well wait
a second you you
know what if I treat it like a human
being what if I'm polite instead of you
know being
CT she said
suddenly I started getting better
Answers by by being polite and you know
back and forth way with a human you know
so saying could you please give me
information about so and so please I'm
really having trouble oh you know that
answer you gave me was fabulous is
exactly what I was looking for and you
know now I need to to go on to the next
part and help me with that too in other
words the way you talk to a human right
if an assistant that you or is it that
she was talking to the AI to chat GPT it
sounds like in this case in the way that
her brain was familiar with asking
questions to a human in other words can
so is the AI learning her and therefore
giving her the sorts of answers that are
more fasile for her to to integrate with
I I think it's both I the first of all
the chat GDP is mirroring you're the way
you treat it it will mirror that back
you you treat it like a machine it will
treat you like a machine okay because
that's that's what it's good at but
here's the surprise surprise is she said
once I re once I started treating it
like a human at the end of the day I
wasn't fatigued
anymore why well it turns out that all
your life you inter you interact with
humans in a certain way and your brain
is wired to do that and it doesn't take
any effort
and so by treating the chat GDP as if it
were a human you're taking advantage of
all the brain circuits in your
brain this is incredible and I'll tell
you why because I think many people not
just me but many people really enjoy
social media um learn from it I mean
yesterday I learned a few things that I
thought were just fascinating about how
we perceive our own um identity
according to whether or not we're
filtering it through the responses of
others or whether or not we take a
couple minutes and really just sit and
think about how we actually feel about
ourselves very interesting ideas about
Locust of of self-perception and things
like that I also looked at a really cool
video of a baby raccoon popping bubbles
while standing on its hind Limbs and
that was really cool and social media
could provide me both those things
within the series of minutes and I was
thinking to myself this is crazy right
the raccoon is kind of trivial but it it
delighted me and that's not trivial so
but here's the
question could it be that one of of the
detrimental aspects of social media is
that if we're complimenting one another
or if we are giving hearts or we're
giving thumbs Downs or we're in an
argument with somebody or we're doing a
clapback or they're clapping back on us
as it or dunking as it's called on on X
on um that it isn't necessarily the way
that we learned to argue it's not
necessarily the way that we learn to
engage in healthy dispute and so as a
consequence it feels like and this is my
experience that certain online
interactions feel really good and others
feel like they kind of great on me like
because there's almost like an action
step that isn't allowed like you can't
fully explain yourself or understand the
other person right and I am somebody who
you know believes in the in the power of
real face-to-face dialogue or at least
on the phone dialogue and I feel the
same way about text messaging I hate
text messaging when text messaging first
came out I remember
thinking I was not a kid that passed
notes in class this feels like Ming
notes in class in fact this whole text
messaging thing is beneath me that's how
I felt and over the years of course I
became a text messager and it's very
useful for certain things be there in
five minutes running a few minutes late
in my case that's a common one um but I
think this notion of what GRS on us and
as it relates to whether or not it
matches our our childhood developed
template of how our brain works is
really key because it touches on
something that I definitely want to talk
about today that that I know you've
worked on quite a bit which is this
concept of energy what we're talking
about here is energy not woo biology woo
science Wellness energy we're talking
about we only have a finite amount of
energy and years ago the great Ben Baris
sadly passed away our former colleague
and uh my uh postto adviser came to me
one day in the hallway and he stopped me
and he said he called me Andy like you
do and he said Andy how can we get so so
a run down of energy as we get older why
are we more why am I more tired today
than I was 10 years ago I was like I
don't know how are you sleeping he's
like I'm sleeping fine Ben never slept
much in the first place but he had a ton
of energy and I thought to
myself I don't know like what is this
energy thing that we're talking about I
want to make sure that we close the
hatch on on this notion of a a template
neural system that then you either find
experiences invigorating or depleting I
want I want to make sure we close the
hatch on that but I want to make sure
that we relate it at some point to this
idea of of energy and why is it that
with each passing year of our life we we
seem to have less of
it you know you asked these great
questions and I wish that I had great
answers well so far you so far you
really do have great answers they're
certainly novel to me in the sense that
I've not heard answers of this sort um
so there's a tremendous amount of
learning for me today and I know for the
audience so so but let's say you're
somebody is 20 years old versus 50 years
old
versus what should they do I mean we
need to integrate with the modern world
world we also need to relate across
Generations oh yeah no this is true this
is people aren't retiring as much
they're living longer birth rates are
down but we have to get all get along as
they say so you know it is interesting I
think it's true that uh we all as we get
older have have less of the you know the
Vigor Vigor if I could use a somewhat
different word from energy uh we'll come
back to that um but I think there are
some who manage to keep an active life
here's something that again in in our
moo we really emphasize could you
explain a moo I think most people won't
know what what a moo is just for their
sake okay this is uh they've been around
for about actually started at Stanford
uh Andrew in uh and de nicer so they
have a company called Cera and what what
happens is that you get professors and
in fact anybody who has knowledge or you
know professional expertise to give
lectures that are available to anybody
in the world who have access to the
internet and and uh you know it could
there's like probably tens of thousands
now any any specialty history uh Science
music you know you name it there there's
somebody who's done you know who's an
expert on that wants to tell you because
they're excited about what they're doing
okay so so you
know what what what we wanted to do was
to help people with
learning and so part of the problem is
that it gets more difficult it takes
more effort as as you get older it
depletes your Vigor more if we're going
to stay with this language of energy and
vigor yeah yeah that's right so let's
actually use the word energy as you know
in the cell there is a physical power
plant called the
mitochondrian which is supplying us with
uh ATP which is the coin of the realm
for the cell to be able to operate all
of its Machinery right so and so one of
the things that happens when when you
get older is that your mitochondrial run
down you have fewer of them and they're
less efficient they're they they that's
right they're less efficient and and
actually drugs can do that to you too it
could they can they can harm
mitochondria or recreational drugs no
the drugs you take for illness I'm not
sure about uh recreational drugs but uh
I know I know it's a case that there are
a lot of drugs that people take because
they have to but uh but but the other
thing and and this is something this
that's the bad news here's the good news
the good news is
that you can replenish your energy by
exercise that exercise is the best drug
you could ever take it's the cheapest
drug you could ever take that can help
every organ in your body it it helps
obviously your heart it helps your brain
it it rejuvenates your brain it helps
your immune system every single organ
system in the body benefits from regular
exercise I run on the beach every day at
the Suk Institute I can I and I also at
the it's on a Mesa 340 foot above the so
I go down every day and then I I climb
up the cliff yeah those steps down to
Black's Beach are are they're good
workout they are they are and so this is
this is something has kept me active and
it's and I I do hiking I went hiking in
the Alps this in last fall so this is uh
in September so this this is I think
something that people really ought to
realize is that you know it's like uh
putting away you know reserves of energy
for you know when you get older the more
you put away the better off you are
here's something else okay now this is
jumping now to
Alzheimer's so uh a study that was done
in China many many years ago when I
first came to U uh La Hoya San
Diego um I heard this from the the it
was the head of the Alzheimer's program
he had done a study in China on onset
and he he they they went and they had
three populations they had PE peasants
who had almost no education then they
had another group that had high school
education and then they were people who
were you know Advanced education so it
turns out that the onset of
Alzheimer's was earlier for the people
who had no
education and it was the latest for the
people who had the most education now
this is interesting interesting isn't it
because it's it's and presumably the
genes aren't that different right I mean
they're all
Chinese so one possibility and and
obviously we don't really know why but
one possibility is that the more you
exercise your brain with
education the more Reserve you have
later in life I I believe in the notion
and I don't have a better word for it
maybe you do or phrase for it is of kind
of a cognitive
um velocity you know I sometimes will
play with this I'll I'll read slowly or
I'll see where my default pace of
reading is at a given time of day and
then I'll intentionally try and read a
little bit faster while also trying to
retain the knowledge I'm reading right
so I'm not just reading the words I'm
I'm trying to absorb the information and
you can feel the energetic demand of
that and then and then I'll play with it
I'll kind of back off a little bit and
then I'll go forward and I try and find
the sweet spot where I'm not reading at
the pace that is reflexive but just a
little bit quicker while also trying to
retain the information and I learned
this um when I had a lot of catching up
to do at one phase of my educational
career fortunately it was pretty early
and I was able to catch up on most
things you know occasionally things slip
through and I have to go back and learn
how to learn you know um and if I get
anything wrong on the internet they sure
as heck pointed out and then we go back
and learn and guess what I never forget
that because punish punishment social
punishment is a great signal so thank
you all um for uh keeping me uh learning
but I picked that up from my experience
of trying to get good at things like
skateboarding or soccer when I was
younger there's a certain um thing that
happens when skateboarding that was my
sport growing up where it's actually
easier to learn something going faster
you know most kids try and learn how to
Olie and kickflip standing in the in the
living room on the carpet that's the
worst way to learn how to do it it's all
easier going a bit faster than you're
comfortable it's also the case that if
you're not paying attention you can get
hurt it's also the case that if you pay
too much cognitive attention you can't
perform the motor movements right so
there's this sweet spot that eventually
I was able to translate into an
understanding of when I sit down to read
a paper or a news article or even listen
to a podcast there's a pace of the
person's voice and then I'll adjust the
the rate of the audio where I have to
engage
cognitively and I know I'm in a mode of
retaining the information and learning
whereas if I just go with my reflexive
Pace it's rare that I'm in that perfect
zone so I I point this out because
perhaps it will be useful to people I
don't know if it's incorporated into
your learning how to learn course but I
do think that there is
something which I call kind of cognitive
velocity which is ideal for learning
versus kind of leisurely scrolling and
this is why I think that social media is
detrimental I think that we train our
brain basically to be slow passive and
multicontext cycling through and unless
something is very high
salience it kind of makes us kind of fat
and lazy forgive the language but I'm
going to be blunt here fat and lazy
cognitively unless we make it a point to
also engage learning right and my guess
is it's tapping into this mitochondrial
system uh very likely uh that's one part
of it uh by the way uh you know the way
that you've adjusted the speed is very
interesting because it turns out that uh
stress you know everybody thinks oh
stress is bad but no it turns out stress
that is Trent you know that is only for
a limited amount of time that you
control is good for you it's good for
your brain it's good for your body I run
intervals on the beach just the way that
you do cognitive intervals when you're
reading in other words I run I run like
hell for about 10 seconds and then I you
know I I go to a jog and I run like hell
for another 10 seconds and it's pushing
your body into into that extra gear that
helps the muscles the muscles need to
know that this is what they've got to
put out and that's where you gain uh uh
you know muscle mass not not from just
doing the same running pace every day
well your intellectual and physical
Vigor is undeniable um I've known you a
long time you've always had a slight
forward Center of mass in your uh
intellect and even the speed at which
you walk Terry D I say okay you're for a
Californian you're a quick Walker okay
yeah so uh that's a compliment by the
way um East Coasters know what I'm
talking about and Californians would be
like you know um why not slow down the
reason to not slow down too much for too
long is that these mitochondrial systems
the energy of the brain and body as you
point out are very linked and I do think
that below a certain threshold it makes
it very hard to come back just like
below a certain threshold is hard to
exercise um without getting depleted or
even injured that we need to maintain
this so perhaps now would be a good time
to close the hatch on this issue of um
how to teach young people everyone
should take this learning tolearn course
as a free resource amazing
um as it relates to
AI do you think that young people and
older people now I'm 49 so put myself in
the older bracket should be learning how
to use AI they are already learning how
to use Ai and uh again it's just like uh
at new technology comes along who picks
it up first it's the younger people and
it's it's astonishing uh you know they
they're using it a lot more than I am
you know I use it uh almost every day
but uh I know a lot of students who
basically and by the way it's a it's
like any other Tool It's A Tool uh that
you you need how to know how to use it
where do you suggest people start so
um I have started using Claude AI okay
this was um suggested to me by somebody
expert in AI as an alternative to chat
GPT I don't have anything against chat
GPT but I'll tell you I really like the
um aesthetic of Claude AI it's a bit of
a softer beige aesthetic it feels kind
of apple like I like the Apple brand and
it gives me answers maybe it's the font
maybe it's the feel maybe this goes back
the example use earlier where I like
Claude Ai and I'm a big fan of it and
they don't pay me to say this I have
never met them I have no relationship to
them except that it gives me answers in
a bullet pointed format that feels very
aesthetically easy to transfer that
information into my brain or onto a page
right so I like Claud AI you use chat
GPT how should people start to explore
AI um for sake of getting smarter
learning knowledge just for the sake of
knowledge having fun with it what's the
best way to do that
well I think exactly what you did which
is of there's there's now dozens and
dozens of different uh chat Bots out
there and different people will uh feel
comfortable with one or the other chat
GDP is the first so that's why it's kind
of taken over a lot of the uh cognitive
space right it's it's become like
Kleenex right that that word that was
why I Ed it as the first word in my new
book because it's iconic but uh but but
some of them um I have to say that for
example there are some that are really
much better at math than
others uh there such as Google's
Gemini recently did some fine tuning
with uh what's called uh you know chain
of of reasoning other words when you
reason you go through a sequence of
steps and when you solve a math problem
you go through a sequence of par of
steps of doing you know fitting first
finding out what missing and then adding
that and it went from 20% correct to
80 right on on those problems and as
people hear that they probably think
well that means 20% wrong still but
could you imagine any human or panel of
humans behind a wall where if you asked
it a question and then another question
and another question that it would give
you back better than 80% accurate
information in a matter of seconds so I
think we we are uh uh being uh perhaps a
little bit uh unfair to compare these
large language models to the best humans
rather than the average human right as
you said most people couldn't pass the
LSAT the law test to get into law school
or MCAT the test to get into medical
school and chat GPT
has is there a world now where we take
the existing AI llms these computers
basically that can learn like a
collection of human brains and send that
somehow into the future right give them
an imagined future okay could we give
them outcome a and outcome B and let
them forage
into future states that we are not yet
able to get to and then harness that
knowledge and explore the two different
outcome comes I think that's perhaps the
the better question in some sense um
because we can't travel back in time but
we can perhaps travel into the future
with AI if you provide it different
scenarios and you say unlike a panel of
people panel of experts medical experts
or um space Travel Experts or um sea
Travel Experts you can't say hey you
know what don't sleep tonight
um you're just going to work for the
next 48 hours in fact you're going to
work for the next 3 weeks or three
months um and you know what you're not
going to do anything else you're not
going to pay attention to your health
you're not going to do anything else but
you can take a large language model and
you can say just forage for knowledge
under the following different scenarios
and then have that Fleet of large
language models come back and give us
the information like I don't know
tomorrow okay so I've lived through this
myself back in the 19
1980s I was just starting my career and
I was one of the Pioneers in developing
learning algorithms for neural network
models Jeff Hinton and I collaborated
together on something called the B
Machine and he actually won a no prize
for this Rec just this year yeah one of
my best friends uh you know brilliant
and and he he well deserved it for not
just the Boler machine but all the work
he's done since then on um machine
learning and then uh back propagation
and so forth but um back then we Jeff
and I had this view of the
future AI was dominated by symbol
processing rules logic right writing
computer programs for every problem you
need a different computer program and it
was very uh you know human resource
intensive to write programs so that it
was very very uh slow-going and they
never actually got there they never
wrote a program for vision for example
even though the computer vision computer
Community really worked hard for a long
time but you know we had this view of
the future we had this view that uh the
the Nature has solved these problems and
is existence proof that you can solve
the vision problem look every animal can
see even insects right come on uh well
figure out let's figure out how they did
it maybe we can help by following up uh
when on nature we can actually again
going back to algorithms I was telling
you and so in the case of the brain what
makes it different from a digital
computer digital computers basically can
run any program but a fly brain for
example only runs the program that it's
a special purpose Hardware allows it to
run not much neuroplasticity there's
enough there just enough you habituation
and so forth uh so that you can survive
and this is survive 24 hours I'm not
trying to be disparaging to the fly
biologist but when I think of
neuroplasticity I think of the
Magnificent neuroplasticity of the human
brain to customize to a world of
experience I agree you know when I think
about a fly I think about a really cool
set of neural circuits that um that work
really well to avoid getting swatted to
eating and to reproducing and not a
whole lot else they don't really build
technology they might have interesting
relationships but who knows who cares it
just sort of like it's not that it
doesn't matter it's just a question of
the lack of plasticity makes them kind
of a meh species okay I can see I've
pressed your button here no no no no I
love fly biology they taught us about
algorithms for direction selectivity in
the visual system no no I I love the
drop biology I just think that the lack
of
neuroplasticity reveals a certain um
like key limitation and that the reason
we're the curators of the earth is
because we have so much plasticity of
course of course uh but you have to take
you know one step at a time nature first
has to be able to create creatures that
can survive and then you know their
brain get bigger as they uh environment
gets more complex and you know here we
are but uh but the the the the the key
is that it turns out that certain
algorithms in the fly brain are present
in our brain like conditioning classical
conditioning you can classical condition
of fly in terms of you know training it
to to uh when you give it a reward it
will produce the same action right this
is like conditioned behavior and that
algorithm that I told you about that is
in your value function right temporal
difference learning that algorithm is in
the fly brain it's in your brain so we
we can learn about learn
from many species I was just having a
little fun poking at the fly biologist I
actually think dropa has done a great
deal as has honeybee biology uh for
instance if you if you give caffeine to
uh uh bees on particular flowers they'll
actually um try and pollinate those
flowers more because they actually like
the feeling of of being caffein there's
a bad pun about a buzz here but I'm not
going to make that pun cuz everyone's
done it before um right no I I I fully
absorb and agree with the the value of
studying simpler organisms to find the
algorithms right that's where we are
right now uh but uh now to go just go
into the future now I'm telling the
story about what where we were we were
predicting the future we were saying
this is an alternative traditional uh AI
we were not taken seriously everybody
was experts said no no WR programs right
programs they were getting all the
resources the grants the jobs and we
were just like the little furry mammals
under the feet of the these dinosaurs
right in retrospect I love the
analogy but but here but the dinosaurs
died off this is this is but the point
I'm making is that it's possible for our
brain to make these extrapolations into
the future why not
AI versions of brains why not I I I
think it's your idea is a great one yeah
I I
mean the reason I'm excited about Ai and
increasingly so across the course of
this conversation
is because there are very few
opportunities to forage information at
such large scale and around the
circadian clock I mean if there's one
thing that we are truly a slave to as
humans is the Circadian biology right
you got to sleep sooner or later and
even if you don't your cognition really
waxes and wains across the Circadian
cycle and if you don't you're going to
die early we know this computers can
work work
work uh sure you got to power them
there's the cool thing there are a bunch
of things related to that but
that's that's tractable so computers can
work work
work and the idea that they can provide
a portal into the future and that they
can just bring it back so we can take a
look see I'm not saying we have to
implement their their advice but to be
able to send a panel of diverse
computationally
diverse experientially diverse
AI experts into the future and bring us
back a panel of potential routes to take
to me is so
exciting um maybe a good example would
be um like treatments for schizophrenia
this is an area that I I want to make
certain that we talk about you know I
grew up learning as a neuroscience
student that schizophrenia was somehow A
A disruption of the dopamine system
because if you give neuroleptic drugs
that block dopamine receptors that you
get some improvement in the in the motor
symptoms some of the hallucinations Etc
you now also have people who say no
that's not really the basis of
schizophrenia I love your thoughts and
you have incredible work from people
like Chris Palmer at Harvard and we even
have a department at Stanford now uh
focusing we even have people at Stanford
now focusing on what Chris really
founded as a field which is metabolic
Psychiatry the idea that who could
imagine I'm being sarcastic here what
you eat impacts your mitochondria how
you exercise impacts your mitochondria
mitochondria impacts brain function and
what and behold metabolic health of the
brain and body impacts schizophrenia
symptoms and he's looked at ways that
people can use ketogenic diet maybe not
to cure but to treat and in some cases
maybe even cure schizophrenia so here we
are at this place where we still don't
have a quote unquote cure for
schizophrenia but you could
send llms into the future and start to
forage the most likely all of the data
in those fields I could do that in an
hour plus it come up with a bunch of
hypothesized different um positive and
negative result clinical trials that
don't even exist yet 10,000 subjects in
Scandinavia who you know go on ketogenic
diet who have a certain level of um uh
susceptibility of schizophrenia based on
what we know from twin studies things
that never ever ever would be possible
to do in an afternoon maybe even in a
year there's isn't funding there isn't
and boom get the answers back and let
them present us those answers and then
you say well it's it's artificial but so
are human brains coming up with these
experiments so to me I'm starting to
realize that it's not that we have to
implement everything that AI tells us or
offers us it just sure as hell gives us
a great window into what might be
happening or is likely to happen
specifically for schizophrenia I'm
pretty sure that if we had these large
language models 20 years ago we would
have known back then that ketamine would
have been a really good drug to try to
help these people tell us about the
relationship between ketamine and
schizophrenia okay um because I think a
lot of people and maybe you could Define
schizophrenia even though most people
think about people hearing voices and
psychosis like there's there's a bit
more to it um that maybe we just you
know con bring out so uh one of the
things now that we know see the problem
is that if you look at the endpoint that
doesn't tell you what started the
problem it started during early in
development you know schizophrenia
is something that uh is appears when you
know late adolescence early adulthood
but it actually is already a problem uh
genetic problem from Theo so what is the
concordance in identical twins meaning
if you have one identical twin if you
have if you have identical twins in the
womb right and one is destined to be
full-blown schizophrenic what's the
probability the other so here's here's
here's the experiment okay this is very
very been replicated many many times in
mice I should say oh no actually it it
okay let me start with a human Okay so
ketamine is was for a long time and it
still is a party drug Special
K I've never taken it but this is what I
hear of anesthetic but I'll tell you
what happens because I've I've talked to
these you know people who have done
this you take ketamine sub anesthetic by
the way it's an anesthetic it's given to
Children uh it's a pretty good
anesthetic and it's also used veterinary
medicine but in any case you give it you
give it to um you take you know young
adults here's what they experience they
experience out of- body experience you
know they they they have this wonderful
feeling of
energy and they're very you know it's a
it's a high but it's a very unusual
high
now you know if if if they just go and
have one experience but if they have two
like they they party two days in a row a
lot of them come into the imersion
emergency room and here's what the what
the symptoms
are
full-blown psychosis full-blown we're
talking about you know
indistinguishable from a schizophrenic
break so auditory hallucination yeah
auditory hallucinations you know
paranoia very very Advanced you know
you'd say that my God this this person
here is is really is gone you know in in
has become a schizophrenic and this is
really uh like I say the symptoms are
the same however if you isolate them for
a couple days they'll come back right so
so it means that schizophrenia can
induce I me sorry ketamine can induce a
form of schizophrenia
psychosis temporarily not permanently
fortunately okay so what does it attack
okay and there's another literature on
this it turns out that it binds to a a
form of receptor a glutamate receptor
called nmda receptors which are very
important by way for learning a memory
but we know the Target and we also know
what the uh the acute outcome is that it
it reduces the strength of the
inhibitory circuit the the interneurons
that use inhibitory
transmitters get the the the enzyme that
creates the inhibitory transmitter is
downregulated and what does that do it
means that there's more excitation and
what does that mean when there's more
excitation it means that there's more
activity in the cortex and there's
actually much more Vigor and and you you
you you start becoming crazy right if
it's too much activity so this is
interesting so this is this is telling
us I think that we should be thinking
about uh and now there's a whole field
now in Psychiatry that has to do with uh
you know the glutamate hypothesis for
the the the the first uh where where the
actual
um imbalance first occurs it's an
imbalance between the exciting
inhibitory systems that are in the
cortex are keep you in balance and nmda
and methylaspartate receptors are
glutamate receptors one one class that's
one class that's right okay so now here
is hypothesis for
why ketamine might be good for
depression people are taking it now who
are depressed right so here you have a
drug that causes overe excitation and
here you have a person who's undere
excited depression is associated with
lower excitatory activity in some parts
of the
cortex well if you titrate it you can
come back into balance right so you what
you do is you fight depression with
schizophrenia a touch of schizophrenia
now you you know you have to keep giving
I think once every three weeks they have
to have a you know a new dose of
ketamine but it's helped an enormous
number of people with very very very
severe you know clinical depression so
so as we learn more about the mechanisms
underlying some of these disorders the
better we are going to be at
extrapolating and and coming up with
some solutions at least to prevent it
from getting worse by the way I'm pretty
sure that the large language models
could have figured this out you know
long ago so in an attempt to understand
how we might be able to leverage these
large language models now how would we
have used these large language models
long ago let's say you had 2024 AI
technology in
19 let's have fun here um
1998 the year that I started graduate
school right at that time it was like
the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia
was in every textbook there was a little
bit about glutamate perhaps but you know
um it was all about dopamine so how
would the large language models have
discovered this ketamine was known as a
drug ketamine by the way is very similar
to PCP F cycline which also binds the
nmda receptor um so how would which is
also a part of drug which is also yeah
not one I recommend nor ketamine uh
frankly I I don't recommend any
recreational drugs but I'm not a
recreational drug guy but um what would
those large language models do if they
so you got 2024 technology placed into
1998 they're foraging for existing
knowledge but then are they able to make
predictions like hey this stuff is going
to turn out to be wrong or hey this
stuff okay okay you know you know this
is all very very
speculative uh and really uh we can
begin actually to see this happening now
uh so I have a colleague at the Suk
Institute Rusty
Gage very distinguished neuroscientist
and he was he was one of the he he
discovered that there are new neurons
being born in the hippocampus right
which is something in adults which is
something that in a textbook says that
doesn't happen right so that was around
1998 did right that's right and I
actually have a paper with him where we
tested ltp longterm potentiation of for
actually the effects of exercise on
neurogenesis exercise increases
neurogenesis it it increases the the the
the the cells that it increases
neurogenesis and also this the the cells
that are act are become part of the
circuit more cells become integrated and
this is true in humans as well right
yeah we and there was some cancer drug
that was given that you know that they
showed that it was uh there new cells
that were able that they were able to
later in postmortem to actually see that
they were born in the adult okay so here
we are okay in
1998 and the question is uh can you C
can you jump can you jump into the
Future Okay so
Rusty we were at you
know had to happen to talk about this
issue about you know he's using these
large language models now for his
research I said oh wow how do you use it
and he said we Ed it as an idea pump
what do you mean idea pump well we you
know we give it all of the experiments
that we've done and uh and we have it
you know the the literature its access
to the literature and so forth and we
ask it for ideas for new experiments oh
I love it I love it I was on a plane
where I sat next to a guy that worked at
works at Google and he he's one of the
um main people there in terms of voice
to to text um and text to voice uh
software and he showed me something I'll
provide a link to it because it's
another one of these open resource
things um and I'm not super techy I'm
not like the I don't get an F in
technology don't get an A+ I'm kind of
in the middle so I think I'm pretty
representative of the average listener
for this podcast presumably what you
show me is that you can take um you open
up this website and you can take PDFs or
you can take um URLs so websites uh
website addresses and you just place
them in the margin you literally just
drag and drop them there and then you
can ask
questions and the AI will generate
answers that are based on the content of
whatever you put into this margin
those PDFs those websites and the cool
thing is it references them so you know
which one which article it came from
right and and then you can start asking
it more sophisticated questions
like in the two examples of um the
effects of a drug one being very strong
and one being very weak which of these
papers do you think is more
rigorous based on you know subject
number but also kind of the strength of
the findings you know pretty vague thing
strength of findings is pretty vague
right anyone that argues those are weak
findings those aren't enough subjects
well we know a hell of a lot about human
memory from one patient hm so strength
of findings when people is a subjective
thing right you really have to be an
expert in a field to understand strength
of findings and even then and what's
amazing is it starts giving back answers
like well if you're concerned about
number of subjects this paper but that's
a pretty obvious one which one had more
subjects but it can
start critiquing the statistics that
they used in these papers in very
sophisticated ways and explain back to
you why certain papers may not be
interesting and others are more
interesting and it starts to wait the
evidence oh my God and then you say well
with that weighted evidence can
you hypothesize what would happen if and
so I've done a little bit of this where
it starts trying to predict the future
based on you know 10 papers that you
gave it five minutes ago amazing I don't
think any uh Professor could do that
except in their very specific area of
interest and if they were already
familiar with the papers and it would
take them many hours if not days to read
all those papers in detail and they they
might not actually come up with the same
answers right right yeah so so this is
so actually this is something that uh is
happening in Medicine by the way uh for
doctors who are using AI as an assistant
this is this is really interesting so so
uh and this is Dermatology was a paper
in nature uh you know skin lesions
there's several 2,000 skin
lesions some of them are are you know
cancerous and others are
benign and so in any case they they
tested the expert doctors and then they
tested an AI and they were both doing
about you know
90% right however if you let the doctor
use the AI it boosts the doctor to 98%
98% ACC yes and what's going on there
it's very interesting so it turns out
that although they got the same 90% they
had different expertise that the uh AI
had access to more data and so it could
look at the lesions that were rare that
the doctor may never have seen okay but
the doctor has more in-depth knowledge
of the most common ones that he's seen
over and over again and those the
subtleties and so forth but so putting
them together it makes so much sense
that they're going to improve if they
work together and I think that now what
you're saying is that using AI as a tool
for
Discovery uh it with you know the expert
who's interpreting and and and looking
at the arguments the statistical
arguments and also uh looking at the
paper maybe in a new way maybe that's a
future of science maybe that's what's
going to happen everybody everybody's
worried about oh AI is going to replace
us it's going to be much better than we
are everything and and humans are
obsolete nothing can be further from the
case our strengths and weaknesses are
different and we by working together
it's going to strengthen it's uh you
know
both you know what we do and what AI
does uh and it's it's it's going to be
partnership it's not going to be
adversarial it's going to be a
partnership would you say that's the
case for things like understanding or
discovering um treatments for neurologic
illness um for um
avoiding you know large scale
catastrophes like can it predict um
macro movements uh let me give an
example um here in Los Angeles uh
there's occasionally an accident on the
freeway um you have a lot of cameras
over freeways nowadays um you have
cameras and cars you can imagine all of
the data being sent in in real time and
you could probably um predict accidents
pretty easily I mean these are just
moving objects right at a specific rate
who's driving haphazardly but you could
also potentially um signal takeover of
the brakes or the steering wheel of a
car and prevent accidents I mean certain
cars already do that but could you
essentially
eliminate well let's do something even
more important let's eliminate
traffic I don't know if you can do that
but um because that's a funel problem
but um could you could you predict um
physical events in the world into the
Future Okay this has already been done
not for traffic but for
hurricanes so you you know as you know
the weather is extremely difficult to
predict and except here in California
where it's always going to be
sunny but now uh what they've done is uh
to feed a lot of previous uh data from
previous hurricanes and also uh
simulations of hurricanes you can
simulate them in a in a supercomputer it
takes days and weeks so it's not very
useful for actually accurately
predicting where it's going to hit
Florida but what they did was after
training up the AI on all of this data
it was able to predict with much better
accuracy exactly where in Florida is
going to make a landfall and it it does
that in on your lab laptop in 10
minutes incredible so I something just
clicked for me and it's probably obvious
to you and to most people but I I think
this is true I think what I'm about to
say is true at the beginning of our
conversation we were talking about the
acquisition of knowledge versus the
implementation of knowledge just
learning facts versus learning how to
implement those facts in the form of
physical action or cognitive action
right math problem is cognitive action
physical action okay
AI can do both knowledge acquisition it
can learn facts long lists of facts and
combinations of facts but presumably it
can also run a lot of problem sets and
solve a lot of problem sets I don't
think except with some crude still to me
examples of Robotics that it's very good
at action yet but it will probably get
there at some point robots are getting
better but they're not they're not doing
what we're doing yet
but it seems to me
that as long as they can acquire
knowledge and then solve different
problem sets different iterations of
combinations of knowledge that basically
they are in a position to take any data
about prior events or current events and
make pretty darn good predictions about
the future and run those back to us
quickly
enough and to themselves quickly enough
that they could play out the different
iterations and so I'm thinking
you know one of the problems that seems
to have really vexed neuroscientists and
the field of medicine and the general
public has been like the increase in the
um at least diagnosis of
autism I've heard so many different
hypotheses over the years I think we're
still pretty much in the fog on this
one um could could AI start to come up
with um new and and um potential
Solutions and and treatments if they're
necessary but maybe get to the heart of
this this problem it might and it it
depends on the data you have it depends
on the complexity of the disease um but
it will happen in other words uh we will
use those tools at the best we can
because obviously this if if you can
make any progress at all and and jump
into the future wow that would save
lives that would help so many people out
there I I I really think the promise
here is so great that even though there
are flaws and there are regulatory
problems we just we really really have
to really
push and and we have to do that in a way
that is um going to help people uh you
know in terms of U making their jobs
better and and uh helping them uh solve
problems that otherwise they would have
had difficulty with and so forth and
it's beginning to happen but you know
it's uh these are early days so we're at
a stage right now with I that is similar
to what happened after the first flight
of the W Brothers you know in other
words it's that significant the the the
the achievement that the right brothers
made was to get off the ground 10 feet
and to power forward with a human being
100 feet right that was it that was the
first
flight and it took an enormous amount of
improvements the the most difficult
thing that had to be solved was control
how do you control it how do you make it
go in the direction you want it to go
uh and shades of what's Happening Now in
AI is that you know we are off the
ground we we're not going very far yet
but who knows where it will take us into
the
future let's talk about Parkinson's
disease a depletion of dopamine neurons
that leads to difficulty in smooth
movement
Generation Um and also some cognitive
and mood-based um dysfunction um tell us
about your work on Parkinson's and and
what what did you
learn so uh as as you point out
Parkinson's is uh first a degenerative
disease it's it's very interesting
because the DOP mean cells are a
particular part of the brain the brain
stem and and they are the ones that are
responsible for procedural learning I
told you before about temporal
difference it's DOP mean
cells and uh it's a very powerful way
for the it's a Global signals called a
neurom modulator because it modulates
all the other signals taking place you
know throughout the
cortex and also it's uh very important
for uh
learning uh uh sequences of actions uh
you know that
produce um survival for survival and um
but the the problem is that uh with
certain uh environmental insults you
know of especially you know uh toxins
like
pesticides uh those neurons are very
vulnerable and when they
die you get all of the symptoms that you
just described that the the the people
who have lost those cells uh actually
before the treatment you know elopa
which is a DOP mean
precursor they actually were um became
Kos right they didn't move they were
still alive but just didn't move at
all you know they they tragic yes locked
in it's called yeah it's tragic tragic
so when the when the first uh Trials of
of of elopa were were given to them it
was magical because suddenly they
started talking again so I mean this is
amazing amazing I'm curious when they
started talking again did they report
that their brain State during the locked
in Phase yes was slow velocity like was
it sort of like a dream like state or
they felt like they were in a nap or
were they in there like screaming to get
out because their physical velocity
obviously was Zero um they're locked in
after all and I've long
wondered when coming back from a run or
from waking up from a great night's
sleep when I shift into my you know
waking State whether or not physical
velocity and cognitive velocity are
linked okay that's a wonderful
observation or question you know I bet
you know the answer okay here's here's
something that is really uh amazing it's
it was uh discovered
interestingly when you know they they
tend to move slowly as you said but to
them cognitively they they think they're
moving
fast now it's not because they can't
move fast because you can say well can
you move faster sure and they move
normal right but to them they think
they're moving at you know super
velocity so so it's a set point issue so
it's a set point issue yes it's all
about set points that's what what's
really going on and and and the set
point gets further and further down you
know that now now they they without
moving at all they think they're moving
right I mean this is what's going on by
the way you can ask them you know what
was it like you know we were talking to
you and you didn't respond oh I didn't
feel like it the brain confabulates an
answer they have well they they they
that they confabulated it because they
didn't have enough energy or they
couldn't initiate they couldn't initiate
actions that that's one of the things
that they have trouble with it with uh
movements you know starting a movement
yeah as you can tell I'm I'm fascinated
by this notion of cognitive velocity and
again there may be a better or more
accurate or official uh um language for
for it but I feel like it it encompasses
so much of what we try to do when we
learn and the fact that during sleep you
have these very um vivid dreams during
rapid I've move and sleep so cognitive
velocity is very fast time perception is
different than in SL slow wave sleep
dreams
um I really think there's something to
it as a as a um at least one metric that
relates to brain State yes I've long
thought that we know so much more about
brain States during sleep than we do
about wakeful brain States like we talk
about Focus motivated flow I mean the
these are not scientific terms I'm not
I'm not being disparaging of them
they're pretty much all we've got um
until we come up with something better
but like we're biologists and
neuroscientists and computational
neuroscientists in your case and and
we're like trying to figure out like
like what brain state are we in right
now our cognitive velocity is is a you
know a certain value but I think the
more that people think about this um you
know I'll venture to say that the more
that they think a little bit about their
cognitive velocity at different times of
day I start to notice that there's a
tends to be a few times of day for me it
tends to be early to late midm morning
um and then again in the evening after a
little bit of trough and energy that boy
that hour and a half each
like that's the time to get real work
done I can I can mentally Sprint far at
those times right but there are other
times of day when I don't care how much
caffeine I drink I don't care unless
it's a stressful event that I need to
meet the demands of that stress you I
just can't I can't get to that faster
Pace while I'm also engaging you can
read faster you can listen but you're
not using the information you're not
storing the information right what time
a day for you are are no I I I get most
done in the morning and then you're
right later uh after uh uh
dinner uh is is also different though I
think in the
morning uh I'm I'm better at creative
stuff and then I think that in the
evening I'm better at actually just
cranking it out you know interesting um
given the relationship between uh body
temperature and circadian rhythm I would
like to run experiment that um relates
uh core body temperature to cognitive
velocity you know I've actually
noticed this is something that is just
purely subjective but the temperature of
the Sal inside the building is kept 75
it's like you know rock
solid but in the afternoon I feel a
little
chilly it's probably my you know
internal sure you know body temperature
body temperature yeah is probably going
down
and that may correspond to the loss of
energy you know the amount of the
ability for the brain and everything
else by the way you know this is Q10
this is a jargon every single enzyme in
in your every cell can go at different
rates depending on the temperature right
and so yeah so if the body temperature
is doing this and all the cells are
doing this too right so this is uh it's
an explanation I'm not sure if it's the
right one but yeah uh Craig heler my
colleague at Stanford in the biology
department has beautifully described how
the enzymatic uh control over pyruvate I
believe it is controls um muscular
failure that local muscular failure you
know when people are like trying to move
some resistance has everything to do
with the temperature the local
temperature wow that shuts down certain
enzymatic processes that don't allow the
muscles to contract the same way you
know he knows the details and he covered
them on this podcast I'm forgetting the
details you start to go wow like these
enzymes are so beautifully controlled by
temperature and of course his laboratory
is focused on ways to bypass those
temperature um or to change temperature
locally in order to bypass those
limitations and and have shown them
again and again it's it's just
incredible yeah I don't I here we're
speculating about what it would mean for
cognitive velocity but I think um it's
such a different world to think about
the underlying biology as opposed to
just thinking about like a drug you know
you increase dopamine in norepinephrine
and and epinephrine the so-called
catacol means and you're going to
increase energy focus and alertness but
you're going to pay the price you're
going to have a trough in energy focus
and alertness that's proportional to how
much greater it was when you took the
drug boy amphetamines are a good example
Boy you
know you you're going a mile a
minute when you're taking the drug of
course you know you it's it's it's i f
understand that that's your impression
and the reality is you don't actually
accomplish that much more have any llms
so been used to um answer this really
pressing question of what is going to be
the consequence on cognition for these
young brains that have been weaned um
while taking riddlin adderal viance and
other stimulants because we have a we
have you know millions of of kids that
have been raised experiment on our our
you know whole Cadre a whole generation
and you know I I really would like to
know the answer you you're I I wonder if
anybody studying that that's really a
great question because we we gave them
speed effectively you know the drug that
causes uh the brain to be activated but
uh but by the way but but you
know the the you know there's the
consequence is that you know when it
wears off you have no energy right right
you you're just completely spent yeah
that's it that's the pit that's the pit
and so and but that's why you take more
of it you see that's the problem is it's
it's a
spiral um I love how today you're making
it so very clear how computation how
math and computers and AI now are really
shaping the way that we think about
these biological problems which are also
psychological problems which are also
Daily challenges I also love that we
touched on mitochondria and how to
replenish mitochondria I want to make
sure that we talk about a couple of
things that I know are in the back of
people's minds no pun intended here um
which are
Consciousness and Free Will normally I
don't like to talk about these things
not because they're sensitive but
because I find the discussions around
them typically to be more philosophical
than
neurobiological and they tend to be
pretty circular and so you get people
like Kevin Mitchell um who is a real I
think he has a book about free will he
believes in Free Will um you've got
people like Robert spolski wrote the
book determined he doesn't believe in
Free Will how do you feel about Free
Will and is it even a discussion that we
should be having well if you go back 500
years you know the Middle
Ages the the the concept didn't exist or
at least not in the way we use it
because everybody it was it was the the
way that we that humans felt about the
you know the world and how it worked and
and and it's its impact on them was that
it's all fate they had this concept of
Fate which is that there's nothing you
can you can do that that something is is
going to happen to you because of the
what's going on in the the gods up above
or whatever it is right you get you
attribute it to the to the physical
forces around you that caused it not not
to your own free will not to something
that you did that caused you to this to
happen to you right so so I think that
these words that by the way that we use
Free Will Consciousness intelligence
understanding their weasel words because
you can't pin down there is no
definition of Consciousness that
everybody agrees on and it's it's tough
to solve a problem scientific problem if
you don't have a definition that you can
agree
on and uh and you know there's this big
controversy about whether these large
language
models understand language or not right
the way we
do and uh and and what what it really is
revealing is we don't understand what
understanding is we literally we don't
have a really good argument or measure
you know that you could measure
someone's understanding and then apply
it to chat GDP and see whether it's the
same it it probably isn't exactly the
same but maybe there's some Continuum
here we're talking about right um you
know the way I look at it
uh you know it's as if an
alien suddenly landed on Earth and
started talking to us in English
right and the only thing we could be
sure of was that it's not human I met
some people that I wondered about their
uh terrestrial Origins okay okay well
okay now there's a big diversity amongst
humans too you're right about that yeah
yeah certain colleagues of ours at UCSD
years ago uh one in particular in the
physics department who I absolutely
adore as a human being um just had such
an unusual pattern of
speech of behavior totally appropriate
behavior but just unusual in the middle
of a faculty meeting we just kind of
turn to me and start talking while the
other person was presenting and I was
like maybe not now and they'd go and he
would say oh
okay but in any other domain you'd say
he was very socially Adept and so you
know that there's certain people that
just kind of discard with convention and
you kind of Wonder like is he an alien
it's kind of cool in a in a cool way
like you know he's one of my again a
friend and somebody
it's true it's true you know no no every
not everybody uh has adopted the same
social conventions uh you know it could
be a touch of autism I mean yeah that's
a problem that I mean in other words
there are very high functioning autistic
people out there well he's brilliant
this and often they are you
know it's U they're high people who are
brilliant that with autism uh but but
you know could you build an llm that was
more um uh on one end of the spectrum
versus the other to see what kind of
information they for paper I reviewed a
paper seem would be a a a really
important thing to do it's been done
okay there was a paper that I reviewed
where they they they took the LM they
fine-tuned it with different data from
people with different disorders you know
the autism and so forth um and
um
sociopaths you know that's scary but you
want to know the answer no and and they
got they got these llms to behave just
like those people who have these
disorders you can get them to behave
that way yes could you do um political
leaning in
values I haven't seen that but uh it's
pretty clear that to me at least that
that if if you can do sociopathy you can
probably do any political belief you
know but you could also view all this as
um you could take benevolent tracks you
could also say um hyper creative
uh um sensitive to um uh uh emotional
tone of voices and find out what kind of
information that person bring uh excuse
me that llm okay brings back versus
somebody who is very oriented towards
just the content of people's words as
opposed to what what you know because
among people you find this you know if
you've ever left a party with a
significant other and sometimes someone
will say I've had this experience with
like did you see that interaction
between so and so I'm like know what are
you talking about like did you hear that
I'm like no not at all I didn't hear I
heard the words but I did not pick up on
what you were picking up on right and it
was clear that there's two very
different experiences of the same
content based purely on a on a
difference in interpretation of the
tonality okay there's a lot of
information that you as you point out
which has to do with uh the tone the uh
in spatial
Expressions uh you know there's a
tremendous amount of information that is
is pass not just with words but with all
the other parts the visual input and so
forth and some people are good at
picking that up and others are not
there's a tremendous variability between
individuals and you know that's that's
biology is all about diversity and it's
all about you know needing gene pool
that's very diverse so that you can
evolve and and uh uh survive
catastrophic changes that uh occur in a
climate for example but uh wouldn't it
be
wonderful
if we
could create an
llm that could understand what the those
differences are now just think about it
right like a truly diverse llm that
integrated all those differences but
here's how what you'd have to do what
you'd have to do is to train it up on
data from a bunch of individuals human
individuals
now one of the things about these llms
is that they don't have a single
Persona they can adopt any Persona you
have to tell it what what you're
expecting from or ask it in a way that
works for you and you'll get back a
certain Persona if you if you if I once
gave it an abstract from a paper very
technical computational
paper and I said you are a
neuroscientist I want you to explain
this abstract to a 10-year-old
it it did it in in a way that I could
never have done it it really simplified
it it some of the subtleties were not in
it but it explained you know what
plasticity it was and explained what a
synapse is and you know it it did that
it's almost like a qualifying exam for a
graduate student I saw something today
on X formerly known as Twitter that blew
my mind that I wanted your thoughts on
that is very appropriate to what you're
saying right now which is someone was
asking questions of an llm on chat G PT
or maybe one of these other anthropic or
Claude or something like that u i
probably misuse those names one of the
the the AI um uh online sites
and somewhere in the middle of its
answers the llm decide to just take a
break and start looking at pictures of
landscapes in yede like the llm was was
doing what a what a what a maybe
cognitive cognitively fatigued person or
what any kind of online person person
online would do which was to like take a
break and look at a couple pictures of
something they you know maybe they're
thinking about going camping there or
something and then get back to whatever
task we hear about hallucinations in AI
that some that it can imagine things
that aren't there just like a human
brain but um that blew my mind I haven't
encountered that but you know isn't it
fascinating uh you know that that's a
sign of of a real generative internal
model uh if if it's see here's the thing
that U real the thing that most
distinguishes I think in llm from a
human is that you know if if you if if
if you go into a room quiet room and
just sit there without any sensory
stimulation your brain keeps thinking
right in other words you you think
about what you want to do you know
planning ahead or something that
happened to you during the day right
your brain is always generating
internally
you know after talking to you one of
these large language models just goes
blank there is no
self uh continuous self-generated
thoughts and yet we know self-generated
thought and in particular brain activity
during sleep as you Illustrated earlier
with the example of sleep spindles and
rapid eye movement sleep are absolutely
critical for um shaping the knowledge
that we were experience during the day
so yes so these llms are not quite where
we are at yet I mean they they can um
outperform Us in certain things like go
um but how soon will we have llms ai
that is with um self-generated internal
activity we're we're getting closer um
and and so this is something I'm working
on myself actually uh trying to
understand how that's done in our own
brain brains was generating
continual uh brain activity that leads
to you know planning and things that we
don't know what the answer to that is
yet in Neuroscience it it it and by the
way you go to a lecture and you you hear
the words one after the next over an
hour and you see the slides one after
the next at the end you ask a question
right just let's think about what you
just did somehow you're able to
integrate all that information over the
hour and and then use your long-term
memory then to come up with some insight
or some issue that you want that how did
your brain
remember all that
information working memory traditional
working memory that neuroscientist study
is only for a few seconds like or maybe
a telephone number or something but
we're talking about long-term working
memory we don't understand how that is
done and llms actually large language
models can do something it's called in
context learning and and it's a really
it was a great surprise because there is
no plasticity the thing learns at the
beginning you train it up on data and
then all it does after that is to
inference you know fast loop of Activity
one word after the next right that
that's what happens with no learning no
learning but it's been noticed that as
you continue your dialogue
it seems to get better at things how
could that be how could it be in context
learning even though there's no
plasticity that's a mystery we don't
know the answer to that question yet but
we also don't know what the answer it is
what what the answer is for humans
either
right could I ask you a few questions
about you and as it relates to science
and your trajectory
um building off of what you were just
saying do you have a practice of
meditation or um eyes closed sensory
input reduced or shut down um to drive
your thinking in a particular way or are
you you know at your computer talking to
your students in postto and sprinting on
the beach you know it's no it's funny
you mention that because I get my best
ideas uh not sprinting on the beach but
you know just uh either walking or
jogging uh and it's it's wonderful I
don't know I think you know serotonin
goes up it's it's another neurom
modulator I think that that stimulates
ideas and thoughts and so inevitably I
come back to the my
office and I can't remember any of those
great ideas what do you do about that
well now I take notes okay voice memos
yeah uhhuh and uh and some of them are
pan out you know there's no doubt about
it that you're put into a situation uh
it is a form of meditation you know if
you're running uh in a steady Pace
nothing distracting about you know the
beach or do you listen to music or
podcasts or no I I never listen to
anything except except my my own
thoughts so there's a a former guest on
this podcast um who she happens to be
triped degreed from Harvard but she's
more in the um kind of like personal
coach space but very very high level and
impressive mind impressive human all
around and she has this um concept of
wordlessness that um can be used to
accomplish a number of different things
but this idea that allowing oneself or
or creating conditions for oneself to
enter States throughout the day or maybe
once a day of very minimal sensory input
no lecture no podcast no book no music
nothing and allowing the brain to just
kind of um idle and go a little bit uh
nonlinear if you will right where we're
not constructing thoughts or paying
attention to anyone else's thoughts
through those media venues um in any
kind of structured way as a source of
great ideas and creativity it's been
studied psychologists call it mind
wandering mind wandering yeah it it's it
is a significant literature and it it's
uh often when you have an aha moment
when you know your mind it's wandering
and it's it's thinking
nonlinearly uh in the sense of not
following a sequence that is logical you
know hopping from things the thing often
that's when you get a a great idea uh
with just letting your mind wander yeah
and that happens to me I I wonder
whether social media and just texting in
phones in general have eliminated a lot
of the you know walks to the car after
work where one would normally not be on
a call or in communication with anyone
or anything I used to do experiments
where I was you know like P petting and
running imun you know
imunohistochemistry and it was very
relaxing and I could think while I was
wow I'm and relaxing and thinking of
things and then I I would listen to
music sometimes okay so we have a whole
session uh you know a clip in learning
how to learn about exactly this
phenomenon here's here's what we tell
our students right is that you know if
you're having trouble with some concept
or you know you don't understand
something you're beating your head
against the wall don't ju stop stop just
go off and do something go off and and
clean the dishes go off and you know
walk around the block and inevitably
what happens is when you come back your
your mind is clear and you figure out
what to do and and that's one of the
best pieces of advice that anybody could
get because you know we don't nobody has
told us how the brain works right we we
we we some people are really good at
intuiting uh because they've experienced
you maybe um and and and and but
everybody I okay the other thing is
everybody I know who's really
uh made important
contributions and I'll bet you're one of
them uh you know you're struggling with
some problem at night and you go to bed
and you wake up in the morning Ah that's
the solution that's what I should do
right first thing in the morning when I
wake up is when I I'm almost bombarded
with um I wouldn't say insight and not
always meaningful Insight but
certainly what was unclear becomes
immediately clear onw that's the thing
that is so amazing about sleep and and
and and you can see people who know this
can can count on it in other words the
key is to think about it before you go
to
sleep right your brain works on it
during the sleep period right and so you
know don't watch TV because then who
knows what your brain's going to work
on you know use you know use the time
before you fall asleep to think about
something that is bothering you or maybe
something that you know you're trying to
understand maybe uh you know a paper
that you you read the paper and say oh
you know I'm I'm tired I'm going to go
to sleep you wake up in the morning say
oh I know what's going on in that paper
yeah I mean that's what happens you can
use you know once you know something
about how the brain works you can take
advantage of that do you pay attention
to your dreams do you record them no no
okay so here's the problem dreams seem
so uh
iconic and and a lot of people you
know somehow attribute things to them
but it it there's has never been any
good theory or any good understanding
first of all why we dream we still it's
still not completely clear I mean there
are some ideas but or uh what Tri why
this particular dream is this this does
that have some significance for you and
the only thing that I know uh that might
explain a little bit is that uh you know
the dreams are often very visual uh you
know rapid eye movement sleep so that
there's something happening that that
actually it's interesting all the
neuromodulators are downregulated during
sleep and then during G sleep the
cocoline comes up right so that's a very
powerful neuromodulator it's important
for attention for example but it doesn't
come up in the prefrontal
cortex which means that the circuits in
the prefrontal cortex that are
interpreting what the sensory input
coming
in uh are not turned on so any of these
whatever happens in your visual cortex
is not being monitored anymore so you
get bizarre things you know that you
start floating and you know things
happen to you and you know it's it's not
anchored anymore and so but that does
still doesn't explain why
right why you have that period it's
important because if you block it and
there are some sleeping pills that do
block it you know it really does cause
problems with uh you know normal
cognitive function cannabis as well
people who um come off cannabis um
experience a tremendous REM rebound and
lots of dreaming uh in the T you know
the days and weeks and months after um
cannabis um wow with I don't want to
call it withdrawal cuz that is different
meaning no no it's it's it's a it's a
imbalance that was caused of you know
because the the brain adjusted to the
you know the endocannabinoid levels and
now uh it it's got to go back and it
takes time but it's interesting isn't
interesting it affects dreams I I think
that may be a clue maybe very very
common uh phenomenon um I'm told I'm not
a cannabis user but uh no judgment there
I just am not um it's actually a uh a
book I read years ago when I was in
college so lot long time ago um by Alan
Hobson who was out at Harvard oh yeah I
know him who um oh cool so I never met
him um but he had this interesting idea
that dreams in particular rapid eye
movement dreams were so very similar to
the experience that one has on certain
psychedelics LSD lysergic acid dimide or
psilocybin and that perhaps dreams are
revealing the unconscious mind you know
and not saying this any psychological
terms you know that you know when we're
asleep our conscious mind can't control
thought and action in the same way
obviously and kind of a it's sort of a
recession of the water line you know so
we're getting more of the the uh
unconscious processing revealed you know
that's an interesting hypothesis how
would you test it uh probably have to
put someone in a scanner have them go to
sleep put them in the scanner on a um
psilocybin Journey this kind of thing um
you know that it's tough I mean any of
these observational studies of course we
both know are deficient in the sense
that what you'd really like to do is
control the neural activity that's right
you'd like to get in there and tickle
the neurons over here and see how the
brain changes and you'd love to get
real- time subjective report this is the
problem with sleep and dreaming is
people you can wake people up and ask
them what they were just dreaming about
but you can't really know what they're
dreaming about in real time it's true
yeah it's true by the way you know there
are two kinds of dreams h very
interesting uh so if you wake someone up
during R sleep you you get very
Vivid uh changing dreams are always
they're always different and changing
but if you wake someone up during slow
wave sleep you often get a dream report
but it's kind of dream that keeps
repeating over and over again every
night and it's a very heavy emotional
content interesting that's in in slow
wave sleep yeah because I've had a few
dreams over and over and over throughout
my life so this would be in slow wave
sleep yeah probably slow W sleep yeah
fascinating
um as a neuroscientist who's
computationally oriented but really you
incorporate the biology so well into
your work so that's one of the reasons
you're you you're this luminary of your
field and who's also now really excited
about
AI what are you most excited about now
like if you had and you know of course
this isn't the case but if you had like
24 more months to just pour yourself
into something and then you had to hand
the keys to your lab over to someone
else what would you go all in on well so
the NIH has something called the Pioneer
award and what they're looking for are
big
ideas that could have a huge impact
right so I put one in recently and and
and here's the the the the title is
um a temporal context in brains and
Transformers and in brains and
transforms Transformers formers AI right
the the the key to uh chat GTP is the
fact there this new architecture it's a
deep learning architecture feedforward
network but it's called a
Transformer and it has certain parts in
it that are are unique there one called
self
attention and and and it's it's it's a
way of doing what is called temporal
context uh what it does is it connects
words that are far apart you give it a
sequence of words and it can tell you
the association like if I you use the
word
this and then you have to figure out in
the last sentence what it did refer to
well there's three or four nouns it
could have referred to but from Context
you can figure out which one it does and
you can learn that Association could um
could I just play with another example
to make sure I understand this correctly
um I've seen these word bubble charts
like if we were to say piano you'd say
keys you'd say music you'd say seat you
and then you know it kind of builds out
a word cloud of Association and then
over here we'd say um I don't know I'm
thinking about the Salin say Sunset
Stonehenge anyone that looks up there's
this phenomena Sal henge then you start
building out a word cloud over there
these are disperate things except I've
been to a classical music concert at the
Suk Institute Symphony OFA twice so
they're not completely non-overlapping
and so you start getting associations at
a distance and eventually they Bridge
together is this what you're referring
to yes I think that that's uh an example
but uh it turns out that every word is
ambiguous it has like three four
meanings and so you have to figure that
out from Context and and there so in
other words there there are words that
live
together and and uh that come up often
and you can learn that from just by you
know predicting the next word in a
sentence that's how a Transformer is get
trained you give it a bunch of words and
it keeps predicting the next word in the
sentence like in my email now it tries
to
mostly right part of the time okay well
that's because it's a very primitive
version of this algorithm what happen is
if you treat if you train it up on
enough it not not only can It answer the
next
word it it it build internally builds up
a semantic representation in the same
way you describe the words that are
related to each other having uh you know
associations uh it can figure that out
and it has representations inside this
very large network with trillions of
parameters unbelievable how big they
gotten uh and the uh th those those
associations now form an internal model
of the meaning of the sentence literally
it it it it it it's been this is
something that now we've probed these
Transformers and so we we pretty much
are
are pretty
confident and that means that it's
forming an internal model of the outside
world in this case a bunch of
words and that's how it's able to
actually respond to you in a way that is
sensible that makes sense and actually
is interesting and so forth uh and it's
all the self- attention I'm talking
about so any case my Pioneer proposal is
to figure out how does the brain do
self-attention right it it's got to do
it
somehow and I'll give you a little hint
basil ganglia it's in the basil ganglia
that's my hypothesis well we'll see I
mean you
know I've I'll be working with
experimental
people uh I've worked with John Reynolds
for example who studies uh primate
visual cortex and we've looked at
traveling ways there and and there are
other people that have looked at U in
primates and the you know and so now
these traveling waves I think are also a
part of the of the the you know the
puzzle pieces of the puzzle that are
going to give us a much better view of
how the the cortex is organized and how
it interacts with the basil ganglia I've
already we've already been there but
we're we we still you know
neuroscientists have studied each one of
these parts of the brain independently
and now we have to start thinking about
putting the pieces of the puzzle
together right trying to get all the
things that we know about these areas
and see how they work together in a
computational way and that's really
where I want to go I love it and I do
hope they decide to fund your Pioneer
award I do too yeah and should they make
the bad decision not to you know maybe
we will'll figure out another way to get
it get the work done certainly you will
um Terry I I want to thank you um first
of all for coming here today taking time
out of your busy cognitive and running
and teaching and research schedule to
share your know with us and also for the
incredible work that you're doing on
public education and teaching the public
I should say giving the public resources
to learn how to learn better at zero
cost so we will certainly provide links
to learning how to learn and your book
and to these other incredible resources
that you've shared and you've also given
us a ton of practical tools today
related to exercise mitochondria and
some of the things that you do which of
course are just your versions of what
you do but that c certainly certainly
are going to be of value to people
including me in our cognitive and
physical Pursuits and frankly just
longevity I mean this this is uh not
lost on me and those listening that uh
your Vigor is as I mentioned earlier
undeniable and it's been such a pleasure
over the years to just see the amount of
focus and energy and enthusiasm that you
bring to your work and to observe that
it not only hasn't slowed but you're
picking up velocity so thank you so much
for for educating us today I I know I
speak on behalf of myself and many many
people listening and watching this is a
real gift uh a real incredible
experience to learn from you so thank
you so much well thank you and I have to
say that I've been blessed over the
years with wonderful students and
wonderful colleagues and I count you
among them who really I've learned a lot
from thank you but you know we're we're
you know science is a social
ity and and we learn from each other and
we all make
mistakes uh but we learn from our
mistakes and that's the beauty of
science is that we can make progress now
you know your career has been remarkable
too because you have affected and
influenced more people than anybody else
I know
personally with with uh the knowledge
that you are uh uh
broadcasting through your interviews but
also you know just in terms of your
interests uh really I'm I'm really
impressed with what you've done and and
I want you to
keep you know at it because uh we need
people like you um we need uh we need U
scientists who can actually Express and
reach the public if we if we don't do
that everything we do is behind closed
doors right nothing gets out and and so
you're you're one of the the best of of
the breed in terms of being able to uh
explain things in a clear way that gets
through to more people than anybody else
I know well thank you I'm very honored
to hear that it's a labor of love for me
and um and I'll take those words in and
I I really appreciate it uh it's an
honor and a privilege to sit with you
today and please come back again I would
be love to I would love to you all right
thank you Terry you're welcome thank you
for joining me for today's discussion
with Dr Terry sinowski to find links to
his work the zeroc cost online learning
portal that he and his colleagues have
developed and to find links to his new
book please see the show note captions
if you're learning from Andor enjoying
this podcast please subscribe to our
YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc
cost way to support us in addition
please follow the podcast on both
Spotify and apple and on both Spotify
and apple you can leave us up to a
five-star review please check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast if you
have questions or comments about the
podcast or guests or topics that you'd
like me to consider for the hubman Lab
podcast please put those in the comment
section on YouTube I do read all the
comments for those of you that haven't
heard I have a new book coming out it's
my very first book it's entitled
protocols and operating manual for the
human body this is a book that I've been
working on for more than 5 years and
that's based on more than 30 years of
research and experience and it covers
protocols for everything from sleep to
exercise to Stress Control protocols
related to focus and motivation and of
course I provide the scientific
substantiation for the protocols that
are included the book is now available
by pre-sale at protocols book.com there
you can find links to various vendors
you can pick the one that you like best
again the book is called protocols an
operating manual for the human body if
you're not already following me on
social media I am hubman lab on all
social media platforms so that's
Instagram X formerly known as Twitter
threads Facebook and Linkedin and on all
those platforms I discuss science and
science related tools some of which
overlaps with the content of the hubman
Lab podcast but much of which is
distinct from the content on the
huberman Lab podcast again that's hubman
lab on all social media platforms if you
haven't already subscribed to our neural
network newsletter our neural network
newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly
newsletter that includes podcast
summaries as well as protocols in the
form of brief 1 to3 page PDFs those one
to three-page PDFs cover things like
deliberate heat exposure deliberate cold
exposure we have a foundational Fitness
protocol we also have protocols for
optimizing your sleep dopamine and much
more again all available completely zero
cost simply go to hubman lab.com go to
the menu tab scroll down to newsletter
and provide your email we do not share
your email with anybody thank you once
again for joining me for today's
discussion with Dr Terry sinowski and
last but certainly not least thank you
for your interest in science
[Music]