welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Shauna
Swan Dr Shauna Swan is a professor of
environmental medicine and Public Health
at the mount siai school of medicine she
is a world expert in how exposure to
various toxins and compounds in the food
and environment impact our reproductive
Health she focuses on how these
compounds in our air in our food supply
in our water supply in cosmetics even in
household items impact the developing
fetus children and adults at the level
of their reproductive biology so things
like testosterone and estrogen and the
pathways within the brain and body that
are impacted by testosterone and
estrogen but also how all of those
things in our environment and that we
put into our body impact our health on a
daily basis and our long-term health so
during today's discussion you will learn
why fertility rates are indeed
dramatically dropping from year to year
and have been for quite some time now
you'll also learn why testosterone
levels are dropping why sperm counts are
dropping why things like polycystic
ovarian syndrome are increasing in women
and what we can do about it in fact
during much of today's discussion Dr
Swan emphasizes the things that you can
do every single day and that in fact
turn out to be very simple they involve
certain things to do and certain things
to avoid in order to limit your exposure
to these environmental toxins and their
impact so by the end of today's episode
you will be highly informed by the world
expert on endocrine disruptors and
environmental toxins and you will also
be highly informed in terms of how you
can have agency how you can take control
of your health in relation to these
various compounds before we begin I'd
like to emphasize that this podcast is
separate from my teaching and research
roles at Stanford it is however part of
my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to Consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is element
element is an electrolyte drink that has
everything you need and nothing you
don't that means the electrolytes sodium
magnesium and potassium in the correct
ratios but no sugar we should all know
that proper hydration is critical for
optimal brain body function in fact even
a slight degree of dehydration can
diminish your cognitive and physical
performance to a considerable degree
it's also important that you're not just
hydrated but that you get adequate
amounts of electrolytes in the right
ratios drinking a packet of element
dissolved in water makes it very easy to
ensure that you're getting adequate
amounts of hydration and electrolytes to
make sure that I'm getting proper
amounts of both I dissolve one packet of
element in about 16 to 32 ounces of
water when I wake up in the morning and
I drink that basically first thing in
the morning I'll also drink a packet of
element dissolved in water during any
kind of physical exercise that I'm doing
especially on hot days when I'm sweating
a lot and losing water and electrolytes
there are a bunch of different great
tasting flavors of element and now that
we're entering the winter months at
least here in the northern hemisphere
element has their chocolate medley
flavors back in stock I really like
these chocolate flavors especially the
chocolate mint when mixed into hot water
and of course despite being a bit colder
outside hydration is still critically
important in fact a lot of people don't
realize this but even when it's cold out
it's easy to get dehydr ated and that's
because the air is dry and so even
though you don't notice the accumulation
of sweat on your skin you can still be
losing a lot of water and electrolytes
if you'd like to try element you can go
to drink element.com huberman to claim
an element sample pack with the purchase
of any element drink mix again that's
drink element spelled l m NT so it's
drink element.com huberman to claim a
free sample pack today's episode is also
brought To Us by Roka Roa makes
eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the
absolute highest quality I've been
wearing Roa readers and sunglasses for
years now and I love them they're
lightweight they have superb Optics and
theyve lots of frames to choose from I'm
excited to share that Roa and I have
teamed up to create a new style of red
lens glasses these red lens glasses are
meant to be worn in the evening after
the sun goes down they filter out short
wavelength light that comes from screens
and from LED lights the sorts of LED
lights that are most commonly used as
overhead and frankly lamp lighting
nowadays I want to emphasize Roa red l
classes are not traditional blue
blockers they're not designed to be worn
during the day and to filter out blue
light from screen light they're designed
to prevent the full range of wavelengths
that suppress melatonin secretion at
night and that can alter your sleep so
by wearing Roa red lens glasses they
help you calm down and they improve your
transition to sleep most nights I stay
up until about 10: p.m. or even midnight
and I wake up between 5: and 7: a.m.
depending on when I went to sleep now I
put my Roa red lens glasses on as soon
as it gets dark outside and I've noticed
a much easier transition to sleep which
makes sense based on everything we know
about how filtering out shortwave
lengths of light can allow your brain to
function correctly Roa red lens glasses
also look cool frankly you can wear them
out to dinner or to concerts or out with
friends so it turns out it is indeed
possible to support your biology to be
scientific about it and to remain social
after all if you'd like to try Roa go to
roka.com that's
r.com and enter the code huberman to
save 20% off your first order again
that's r.com and enter the code huberman
at checkout today's episode is also
brought To Us by better help better help
offers Professional Therapy with a
licensed therapist carried out entirely
online now I've been doing weekly
therapy for well over 30 years in fact I
consider doing regular therapy just as
important as getting regular exercise
including cardiovascular exercise and
resistance training exercise which of
course I also do every week now there
are essentially three things that great
therapy provides first it provides a
good rapport with somebody that you can
really trust and talk to about any and
all issues that concern you second of
all great therapy provides support in
the form of emotional support but also
directed Guidance the dos and the not
Tod do and third expert therapy can help
you arrive at useful insights that you
would not have arrived at otherwise with
better help they make it very easy to
find an expert therapist with whom you
can really resonate with and provide you
with these three benefits that I
described also because better help is
carried out entirely online it's very
time efficient and easy to fit into a
busy schedule with no commuting to a
therapist office or sitting in a waiting
room or looking for a parking spot so if
you'd like to try better help go to
betterhelp.com huberman to get 10% off
your first month again that's
betterhelp.com
huberman and now for my discussion with
Dr Shauna Swan Dr Shauna Swan welcome Dr
Andrew hberman thank
you I'm super excited for today's
conversation I've followed your work for
a number of years
I've seen some of your appearances on
other podcasts and I got to see you
speak while we were both in Copenhagen I
was in the audience you didn't know I
was there but incredible stuff that
you've been doing at as a researcher as
a public educator as a
writer let's kick off by just asking the
basic
question are there things in our
environment including our food that are
diminishing our reproductive and overall
health and if so which are the ones that
you think about and perhaps if you could
just mentioned a few of the more Salient
um maybe even shocking but Salient
results that you've observed over the
years like what was what was the the
kind of like wo result or results that
have really um steered your attention in
the last a couple of decades and I'll
just say what we were talking about
before we were on the microphone which
is that you are a skeptic you are not
somebody who walks out into the world
and looks for things that could be
messing up our our biology messing up
our health and yet you've found some so
if you could just share with us uh what
you've observed and what you find really
compelling and important for people to
know about we can dive in there that was
a lot of questions I could probably talk
for a long time feel free I won't speak
until you're done no but I want to break
it up let's break it up so I think the
first question about was are there
forces chemicals
agents in the environment that can
affect our reproductive Health yes okay
so my answer to that is yes I think
there's no question about that the
question comes down to when and in whom
and uh what dose and so on and so forth
but whether there
are let's just say broadly things yes of
course um the category that I focus on
are man
made primarily man-made chemicals
although I do also include the influence
of other factors factors of choice for
example sleep exercise that kind of
thing we can talk about that but let's
just focus here on the on the chemicals
because I think that's what led me to do
a lot of my research and to write the
book that I wrote and um so my um thesis
is that chemicals in the
environment that's a very broad class so
we'll have to say some chemicals in the
environment at the right time to the
right organism affect fertility okay so
and let me just say fertility is one
area that I focused on but actually this
class of chemicals that I'm primarily
interested in are those that affect the
body's hormones so those are known as
hormone disrupting chemicals or
endocrine disrupting chemicals um
hormone altering chemicals whatever you
know there's a lot of names but that
helps you focus on where to look for the
effects because if it's hormone altering
you can now have something to really ask
okay here's a chemical does it affect a
hormone which hormone when how and then
you start that's almost an you know
laying out an experiment right there
right so so so focusing in on hormone
disrupting chemicals I think is useful
absolutely yeah and I think much of what
we'll talk about today probably centers
on the estrogen and testosterone
Pathways as they relate to
masculinization or
feminization right of the brain and body
right and sperm and egg right quality so
I'm a reproductive epidemiologist I got
there in an indirect path I think
probably my work on um
oral contraceptives led me there most
directly and oral contraceptives are
endocrine disrupting chemicals that's
what they're designed to do right that's
what they're designed to do change your
body's hormones your reproductive
hormone so it's interesting you know way
back when when I worked on the study at
Kaiser on oral contraceptives which was
the largest study of its kind in the
world actually trying to figure out were
they adverse effects of oral
contraceptives if so you know for whom
and when and how much and so on and so
this was a very great study and um
Coming forward in time
um I you know I studied environmental
chemicals not so much
Pharmaceuticals um for quite a while in
when I was at the California Department
of Health Services and and then I had an
aha moment
um I was flying to Japan with my friend
John Brock who's a chemist at CDC
wonderful chemist and you have long
flights we're talking about this and
this and he says shaa you should look at
thades and I'm going why should I look
at thot I never heard of thades right
and he said well we can now measure them
at the CDC and we see they're in
everybody they're in women of
reproductive age
Fact one fact
two colleagues at the ntp have
shown something they are calling the
phalate
syndrome and so he explained what is ntp
National toxicology program sorry than
for using alphabet super right National
toxicology program a governmental you
know Research Center and um and their
job is to look at chemicals and see what
is the toxicity so it could be
reproductive it could be carcinogenicity
it could be neurotoxicity that's what
they do and um so they had signaled out
these thids as being reproductively
toxic and specifically to males and
specifically when exposure is in utero
pregnant mom is exposed to
phalates and
somehow the fetus is disrupted yes if
you don't mind I'd like to know um is
Mom ingesting phalates in the form of
food is she inhaling phalates are they
landing on her skin what are the modes
of entry into the body of the mom that
um let's just assume it goes through the
placental barrier into the fetus and is
impacting fetal development right so in
those experiments it was through food
but we are exposed in all those ways you
mentioned every way that something can
get into our body thies get in there but
let's come back to that let me go to the
experiment at ntp so what they did at
ntp National toxicology program they
they fed um mother rats various doses of
these various thades and um and what
they found
was no changes in the females or not
that they found at that time they're the
female Offspring female Offspring sorry
but in the male offspring they found
that the genitals
were I summarize it by saying
incompletely masculinized so I'll
explain what that is so for that I have
to back up and say um something you know
probably know very well but I'll just
explain it the genital tract initially
is a ridge it's a single Ridge it's the
same in males and females it's not
sexually dimorphic at the beginning and
then under the influence of testosterone
in a very specific window called the
male programming window in rats its days
I think 9 to 12 of gestation so very
short window to orient people I think
rat mouse gestation is about 21 days or
so yeah okay so so so it's for us it'll
be early first trimester okay but that
comes later so so um at that time if
they feed their mother that chemical in
her food then her male offspring are
born with changes in his genitals or
more likely to right and so what they
tend to have is a smaller
penis um less Descent of the testin is
more likely to have unended testicles um
there are internal changes that we
didn't get into in our human study
because we can't look there but um the
epidemis there are changes and so on the
whole genital tract is altered and the
most important measure for me as it
turned out and for
humans um and perhaps for Animals is
something that the scientists animal
scientists had studied for a long time
for actually 90 plus years but had never
been studied in humans and that is the
distance from the anus to the genitals
this collection of changes in the male
genitals was given the name the thallid
syndrome now you're a physician and you
I challenge you to think of any syndrome
aside from
alcohol you know they FAL alcohol
syndrome of course there's a syndrome
but not what syndrome is attached to a
chemical class just for um technical
purposes I'm a PhD not a clinician but
um but but I worked on neural
development for many years and and then
prior to that some endocrine stuff so
I'm I'm um fasile with the general terms
um one that comes to mind would be for
instance
um the thalidomide babies right a
miscarriage anti- miscarriage drug that
changed limb development that's a very
extreme example um I would say for um in
um human de normal development what I'm
most familiar with are the or early
organizing effects of androgens that
convert to estrogen on external
phenotype which is basically nerd speak
for during development the Y chromosome
uh produces it leads to the production
of a number of genes and eventually
proteins through RNA Etc that um are
including testosterone and
dihydrotestosterone that in the brain
organizes the brain male and causes the
growth of the penis or organizes meaning
it is it sets up the penis to then
during puberty when the penis is exposed
to testosterone and estrogen and DHT
it's a bunch of things not just
testosterone the penuts Grows Right so
that and lots of other right other
things right so so the um the the word
soup that I just uh you know put forward
is basically saying that there a lot of
things in development where hormones set
up a uh a potential to respond to other
hormones later it's not that
testosterone grows the penis during
development it does that but more so it
establishes a potential for the penis to
grow when exposed to things later during
puberty do have that right right right
as far as the name goes which is the
thid syndrome there is thalidomide it's
not usually called theide syndrome but
it could be so you're right about that
but it's extremely rare and I there is
no
environmentally you know a chemical in
the environment uh as opposed to a
pharmaceutical that is given a syndrome
so this is very very unique and and so I
thought wow John's telling me this on
the plane right something in the
environment that is basically having an
endocrine and body disruptive effect at
least on par with alcohol fetal alcohol
syndrome and phide syndrome right yeah
so when well at this point it was only
animals right because John was telling
me about the ntp study which was in rats
and so I
thought wow you know I like Puzzles so
my first question was is this happening
in humans
you might ask that you know it's a
natural thing to ask great question and
then I thought how would we find
out and answering that
question took me 10 years okay and so if
you think
about okay thight in the
mother changes in the genitals of The
Offspring connect them how do we do that
right so we have to start with th and
the mother so how do we know that well
fortunately or
not I had stored a lot of urine from
pregnant women from a study that I was
doing on sperm count I just got the
women's urine coincidentally if you will
I thought well save it you know it's not
expensive and not hard - 80° freezers
doesn't take a lot of room put it in
there so I had this urine save from
pregnant women
and then I knew from John that we could
look in the urine for thite
metabolites so these are products that
the body forms when they're exposed to
phalates and they you can measure them
in urine so I thought okay I could get
that urine I could look at the thite
metabolites and then I'd know what the
mother was exposed
to and based on the animal data we have
good evidence that it actually makes its
way to the
fetus so then I thought okay then maybe
there's a change in the
babies so then I had to get the babies
so
fortunately I had done this study on
pregnant couples pregnant women and
their partners and I was able to call
them and say would you come in and let
us measure your babies's
genal right how willing were parents to
let you do that that seems they were
okay most of them were okay with that
yeah yeah well they trusted us you know
they had been in a study with us and and
you know we were reputable those babies
were still um young but not newborn so
this was a a while later the the babies
that we actually got were on average I
think about a month uh 12 months old so
not ideal maybe because the rats had
been measured at Birth the rat genitals
have been but that's what we could do at
that time yeah the reason I asked is
there's always the potential for ongoing
phade exposure to the newborn absolutely
so some but I suppose in either case
you're able to draw some potential link
between or potentially draw a link I
have to be careful with my language
there um between phade exposure in utero
and ex utero and these external
biomarkers I mean given that the
critical window is quite short and quite
early by the way let me just say when
the rats they did a lot of work on this
critical window and when the rat moms
were exposed before Day N it did nothing
and when they were exposed after day 12
it did nothing so it was only the
exposure during that critical window is
very delicate and it's by the way true
of the brain as well so there you
teasing out what is the critical window
is one of the challenges that we have
when we work with these chemicals so I
wasn't so much worried about exposure in
the delivery room and you know in their
feed as in the first of life because I
knew it was unlikely to change these
measures do other things but maybe but
not these measures so then the question
became kind of what you were asking is
what do we
measure what do we actually measure and
if you think about a newborn r or Mouse
their genitals are pretty small and
there's not there's it's very difficult
to know exactly how that corresponds to
the human genital system and what you
see at Birth you know when you spread a
boal and and so I got a pediatrician at
in Los Angeles who worked with me on how
to make that translation and how to
do do this exam and that took us quite a
while because we really wanted to come
as close as we could what was clear was
that the the anus part of it was easy
you go to the center of the anus so that
was easy then what's the other landmark
what's the the genital Landmark so it
turns out there are in males two and in
females there are two as well so but
let's just talk about males so for males
the best place to measure and actually
closest to the rat measurement is the
place where the tissue changes uh where
the scrotum um inserts and that it goes
from rugat to
smooth tissue and that point is pretty
clear pretty easy to measure um the
other measure that was the anos scrotal
distance and the other measurement we
took was the anop penile distance and
that was the insertion the anterior
insertion of the penis the part closest
to the body the closest to the Head yeah
closest to the Head yeah and and that
was not so obvious because you don't
have a change in tissue there so where
exactly do you put your caliper and um
we had a lot of discussion about do you
press down do you what
uh you know how where exactly do you
make that Mark and actually the anos
chronal is the measurement with the
least variance because you can measure
most precisely but the anop penol is is
is another measurement and um and then
in you can do something similar in
females and we did that but that's we
maybe don't have to go into that now so
we designed this exam and we did a lot
of work to make sure it was repeatable
across Examiner
and what we finally did was bring the
mothers in bring the babies in um and um
got three measurements and then on every
10th baby we got an independent examiner
to get three measurements so we could
look at within and between examiner
variation you understand this is the
first time this had done been done this
way in humans there was a Mexican study
that tried to do this and I never
learned very much about it and I was
excited that they had done this but I'm
not sure how it relates to this so I
just mentioned that out of honesty you
know there's somebody in Mexico did this
but um to my knowledge this is the first
time it was used as a toxicological
measure in
humans right so we were um we did that
study we related those measurements to
what CDC had measured in the urine of
our women collected while they were
pregnant and we found to Sal Thal
syndrome could you explain what the
correlation was between phalate
metabolite levels which is I believe not
not by number because I don't remember
it anymore but but there was a
significant um let's just take the AGD
the AGD of mothers who had higher levels
of
three the most anti-androgenic phades
I'll tell you what those are in a minute
had significantly shorter
aner gental distance and then I have to
say that which I haven't said should
have that anal distance is actually
dimorphic so it tends to be 50 to 100%
longer in males than females that makes
sense if you think about what's going in
that
space there's a lot of real
estate in in males between the anus and
you know let's say the penis penal
insertion much more than in females so
it's natur that that will be longer but
that that's that's an air and that I
began doing some work in other looking
at other species and it turns out that
that's true in all Maman species except
two and one is the hyena all right and
one is the elephant so in the
hyena I'm just saying this because you
be amused by it I think well I you know
about hyenas I do I know more about
hyena genitalia than I'd like to admit
um and I can tell you why after you
educate us but I'll make I'll keep my um
explanation brief but I'm very familiar
with hyena genitalia so I um I have I
know Steph Glickman who works with a you
might know him too he works in Berkeley
with he was my instructor when I was a
graduate student at Cal and I used to
run in Tien Park I suppose I'll tell it
now and there was a colony of wild
hyenas but they were behind chain link
yes it's actually a favorite hike of
mine up the Strawberry Canyon Trail yeah
and um I did that trail a good friend of
mine uh Brian pgas who's now a professor
of the University of Chicago worked on
the Prairie vs that were also housed at
that facility and um a fun thing to do
was to go see the hyenas with
Steve um they're brutally dangerous
animals um and Steve has tons of stories
about them we we should probably resist
our temptation to spiral into that may
maybe sometime I'll do a little um like
evening chat podast cast where I I tell
Steve Glickman stories he's a delightful
person and um yeah those uh let's just
say this the female hyenas have
clitorises larger than some of the male
hyena penises and those females give
birth through those clitorises yes as we
both know so you will not be surprised
to know that the female HD is longer
than the male right because they're
heavily androgenized exactly as I recall
by andersin Dion as actually I don't
know that it became popular during the
era uh of steroids in professional
baseball because andin diione was being
used pretty uh um frequently in baseball
at that time anyway we have to be we
could go down the spiral of of of uh but
also in terms of behavior the female is
the alpha right right they eat first yes
they're physically and um hierarchically
dominant in in hyen so yeah it's really
interesting isn't it that they would
have a long longer more masculine eneral
distance elephants we won't go into now
but they're kind of Midway in many
things so including they're they're
about equal interrenal distance in males
and females other than that humans and
other species male anal distance is 50
to 100% longer however so three thades
DL hexal Thal
DP dbal Thal DBP and butal benzil phid
bbcp are the most
anti-androgenic testosterone lowering
phades and those are the ones that were
associated with a shorter indal
distance in males in human males human
males and animal so we we replicated
that animal study in
humans and then because you know this is
how it is in science I had to do it all
again
right so I started a whole new
study um and that study is still going
on the children are still being followed
I think we started in um
2012 um the paper first paper on en
General distance came out in 2005 had a
pretty big impact and um so so these are
are studies where you're looking at the
anogenital distance in um
relatively newborn humans then tracking
that distance no that's a different
tracking is another study okay this is
just two studies on demonstrating the
Thal syndrome in human males okay so the
first one I described the second one the
replication and the second one is the
one that's going on still so um and
whether what it does to their
reproductive function we don't know the
kids are only 12 years old now so so we
we would like to know that and we will
know that okay but I have another answer
to for you about that so so we started
the second study and the second study
which is called Tides which is the
infant development environment study um
by the way these are both in four cities
in the United States um and
um there we did it right so we got the
urine in the first you know early urine
because we knew that could be important
we didn't have that option in the first
one remember those urine samples
accidental we got them when we could
right and we got repeated urines one in
each trimester to look at the effects in
different trimesters and then We
examined the baby at birth which is what
the rats so we came much closer to
replicating the the rodent study and we
saw it again I'd like to take a quick
break and thank our sponsor ag1 ag1 is
an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic
drink with adaptogens I've been taking
ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted
that they're sponsoring this podcast the
reason I started taking ag1 and the
reason I still take ag1 once and often
twice a day is because it is the highest
quality and most complete foundational
nutritional supplement what that means
is that ag1 ensures that you're getting
all the necessary vitamins minerals and
other micronutrients to form a strong
foundation for your daily Health ag1
also has probiotics and prebiotics that
support a healthy gut microbiome your
gut microbiome consists of trillions of
microorganisms that line your digestive
tract and impact things such as your
immune system status your metabolic
Health your hormone health and much more
so I've consistently found that when I
take ag1 daily my digestion is improved
my immune system is more robust I rarely
get sick and my mood and mental focus
are at their best in fact if I could
take Just One supplement that supplement
would be ag1 if you'd like to try ag1
you can go to drink a1.com huberman to
claim a special offer for this month
only no M 2024 ag1 is giving away one
free month supply of omega-3 fatty acids
from fish oil in addition to the usual
welcome kit of five free travel packs
and a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 with
your order omega-3 fatty acids are
critical for brain health mood cognition
and much more again go to drink a1.com
huberman to claim this special offer
more thall exposure equates to Shorter
uh anogenital distance in males it it um
was approaching the distribution in
females um it sounds like that that the
distributions moved more closely
together yes yes right yes although it
wasn't the females that moved sorry the
male distribution became more like the
female became more uh right femin could
say feminized but more female like in it
and they but these boys also had smaller
penises less Descent of the testes um
smaller scrotums so they were smaller
you know everything was in their genital
area are all the secondary sex
characteristics of puberty in males
Adams Apple facial growth um thickening
of the vocal cords therefore lowering
the voice Etc are those all later
activating effects of hormones or are
there precursors to those that are
present in in um in males because in
mice as I
recall like like I couldn't I couldn't
tell you like we call it in the
laboratory people always chuckle at this
but it's like sexing the animals when
you you know look to determine if it's a
male or female when they're when they're
really young you have to like look
carefully at first right and then you
get pretty good at it um as they get
older it gets easier but when the mice
are um uh you know feet down back up you
know you can't really you can't really
tell you can't really tell right the as
the mice get older their testicles
become visible in the males from even
from above but you know as far as I know
there aren't really external markers so
you may have found the one truly
external biomarker of maless of maless
and and so I I I do want to say one
thing about females because then that'll
lead me to my conclusion about the role
of this measure um
so if the
mother is exposed to more
testosterone than
expected you might expect that her
female offspring would have a more male
in a genital dist is that the case yes
so it's a bidirectional effect can we
also presume that if the mother either
secretes or is exposed to more Androgen
then the males can become hyper male no
we' never I don't know what that would
be we never saw anything that would be
hyper male um so the the yes I said to
you was the result of a study uh where
we looked at
the girls born to women with PCOS so
women with cosos is you know have excess
testosterone
polycystic sorry polycystic ovari that's
good we've talked about it a little bit
before in the podcast it's a um It's
associated with my understanding is It's
associated with um elevated levels of
androgens that's right and these women
often have facial hair and you know they
not just the moms but the the people the
women with PC yes have elevated
androgens yes not just we're not talking
about pregnant moms anymore right um and
so in our study population we did a
search for women who had diagnosis of
PCOS and took that as a marker of higher
testosterone exposure and then looked at
the girls and yes those girls had a
longer quote more masculine interal
distance what what age group were you
looking at in the INF in the infants oh
the PC was at was at diag at pregnancy
at the time they were pregnant so
presumably people between their like
somewhere in their 20s out to their 40s
yeah yeah
so adult human females who have PCOS
tend to we know they have higher levels
of androgens but they also have more
maleik anogenital distance they do not
their daughters do their daughters do
thank you for that clarification they're
daughters and so put this
together this
measure is a look inside the
womb at the Androgen level that the
fetus is exposed to at that time which
is amazing because you can't go in there
without disturbing you know you
can't uh and so this is very early first
trimester you can't even get you know
flu fluid and so on so this tells you
this is like a readout of what was
in you know in the fluid at the time so
then your next question
was what does this mean for later
fertility yes yeah what what is the
impact of this early Androgen exposure
in to female Offspring or um let's just
say reduction in functional Androgen
exposure to male offspring the reason
I'm using this uh you know loop-to-loop
language as as you probably know but for
the audience not trying to complicate
things here but a lot of the mascul
izing effects of hormones in fetal
development is actually testosterone
that's converted into estrogen so it can
get pretty tricky right and um but maybe
for sake of Simplicity today we'll just
stick with Androgen effects on
masculinization with the understanding
that some of those effects are the
consequence of testosterone being
converted into estrogen right it's just
that people form such strong
associations falsely that you know
testosterone is male mess
that's not true and and and estrogen is
femaleness and they both and it just
gets really murky but for for the time
being
um you identified an external biomarker
of fetal Androgen AKA
masculinization via the mother that's
right got it okay
so then we asked the question you've
asked and many people asked who cares
what what why would
we worry about a boy having a slightly
smaller anog gal distance well I can
tell you there are many boys that are
probably worried about it right now
right they probably got the ruler and
the calipers out right now just you know
um but I'm going to answer that question
right so I told you that our kids are
too young they're not producing sperm
right now right so we had to go to an
adult population
right and so we went to a population of
college students in Rochester New
York and what we did there was make an
assumption which is based on animal data
it's true in animals we've been
following the animal path here all along
so in the animals my colleague Earl Gray
who did these studies said his name is
Earl Gray yeah that's cool
yeah um he said a GD is
forever anogenital distance is forever
now what that means is it's not like
your anogenital distance today is what
it was when you were born of course
you're a bigger person but that means
adjusted for body size right so if you
assume that AGD is forever if you're
born with a short for your size AG then
when you're 20 you'll have a short for
your size
AGD okay can we assume that okay so if
we assume that then if we get these
college students to come in and we can
measure their anogenital distance we're
getting a reflection of what it was when
they were Bor okay and then we can get
their sperm
count and then we can see if they're
related and that's what we did so we got
this population of volunteers paid them
$75 and one of the guys said for 75
bucks you can do
anything and so what we did was we met
measure their anal distance and then we
got them to give us seamen sample and
complete a questionnaire and things you
do in a study we'll link to that study
but I have a couple questions about the
controls in that study just for sake of
people understanding how a study like
this would be done I don't expect you
recall all the all the details but um
you're adjusting for body size and body
weight yeah height weight what are the
factors that would scale here that would
allow you to normalize um in other what
you're trying to do is backtrack to what
it likely was at at um no we didn't
actually try to go back what we let me
just tell you what the results were in
this group of
men if they had a longer anogenital
distance they had a higher sperm count
got it so you were correlating those two
measures right and then if we wanted to
say something about we didn't try to say
anything about how it was when they were
born we just said okay we'll take that
assumption that this reflects their
early
AGD if we want to say something about
early AGD and sperm count so it's easy
to say AGD is related to sperm count
because we measured that we saw that a
correlation that's published okay if we
want to say their early AGD at Birth and
their sperm
count that's a leap of faith in some
sense because we don't have their early
for these guys in Rochester we didn't
measure their AG were there conditions
of being a participant in the study such
as uh refraining from alcohol cannabis
Etc in the 90 days prior 90 days being
the the duration of spermatogenesis yeah
I don't remember that these are college
students so presumably some of them are
drink okay so but in the end it it was a
robust um a robust link and then U Mike
Eisenberg who you might know my
colleague at Stanford he's been on this
podcast good good so he's a colleague of
mine too and um he uh looked at
um men in infertility clinic and those
who had born children and those who had
not born children and the men who had
born children had a longer in gental
distance than men who had never born a
child never born but were trying yes
right these were not people who opted
out these were exactly these were people
who were who are who were having
challenges with fertility versus success
with with uh by the way you know the
question of how you measure AG in an
adult man is a different question
question then how you measure it in a
newborn and we did a lot of work on that
and Michael helped with that too so it
sounds like um oh and may I ask were the
sperm counts that were on the let's just
say the
lower um like the
lower cortile where the quote unquote
lower sperm counts like functionally
lower because I always wonder about this
like it's come up in a number of
discussions like with Robert spolski
with Mike Eisenberg and now I'm asking
you you when we hear that sperm counts
are going down down are they going down
to the point where fertility is is
impacted that's really the the one of
the I think functional questions so I'm
going to let's lay aside the question of
AGD right that's an really interesting
but let's talk about sperm
count okay so um if you there's a a
beautiful
study um among pregnancy planners out of
Denmark
um quite a long time ago um and in that
study what they did was take couples
that were trying to
conceive that had never or not recently
I can't remember used oral
contraceptives and then they
saw what the sperm count was and how
long it took them to conceive right time
to pregnancy in relation
to and what they showed is a really
interesting curve which has never been
correct it to my knowledge it's it's
it's what I use and what I think people
use which is that if you I wish I could
draw it here wish I had a BL you should
have a board a white board the problem
is a lot of people are listening but
maybe we you know we can talk people
through it sorry so so just think about
um a curve where you go all the way down
to zero that would be no
sperm um and then as the probability of
conceiving is zero so you're looking at
sperm count along you know is the x-axis
and
months to
conception um and um what you see is
that if you have no sperm you don't have
no conception if you go up to around 40
45 there's a steep increase so the more
sperm you have 40 45 million million per
milliliter and this is million per Mill
uh so just pure concentration not number
of motile sperm this is just how many
sperm we're not talking about quality
we're Talk number a number and and when
you have 45 to 50 million per Mill
and below it matters a lot what your
sperm count is you know people say it
doesn't matter yeah if you get in this
range where the probability of
conception is dropping off really
rapidly it matters a lot and then
they're around 45 to 50 it starts to
level off and then after that after
certainly after 100 probably 75 it
doesn't matter at all so 100 million
sperm per milliliter yes of semen yes
okay so can you see this okay so it so
when people say does sperm count matter
for fertility yes it matters a lot if
it's low and no it doesn't matter at all
if it's high so you just we just have
too many sperm I mean I don't but humans
you know and there's so nature runs a
probability game overproduced sperm
right some of those will be high quality
some will be low quality depending on
their age when they were that is when
they were generated or their conditions
you know or their conditions how much
heat exposure Etc so nature runs a
probability game that's right hoping
that the the the best quality sperm will
fertilize the egg right um so below
45,000 uh excuse me below 45 million
milon per milliliter below 45 million
sperm per milliliter of semen the sperm
count really matters it drops off
precipitously that's right once you get
up to 75 100 million per Mill
of sperm then it's all good to you're
good to go right and sperm counts uh
range anywhere from you know it could be
low 8 n 10 million per Miller in the
very low situation it could be zero in
some people right all the way up to 400
yeah million there's a huge range that's
right and that's a function of age it's
a function of genetics it's a function
of presumably thied
exposure yeah I'd like to take a quick
break and thank one of our sponsors
function I recently became a function
member after searching for the most
comprehensive approach to lab testing
while I've long been a fan of blood
testing I really wanted to find a more
in-depth program for analyzing blood
urine and saliva to get a full picture
of my heart health my hormone status my
immune system regulation my metabolic
function my vitamin and mineral status
and other critical areas of my overall
health and vitality function not only
provides testing of over 100 biomarkers
key to physical and mental health but it
also analy IES these results and
provides insights from to doctors on
your results for example in one of my
first tests with function I learned that
I had two high levels of mercury in my
blood this was totally surprising to me
I had no idea prior to taking the test
function not only helped me detect this
but offered medical doctor informed
insights on how to best reduce those
mercury levels which included limiting
my tuna consumption because I'd been
eating a lot of tuna while also making
an effort to eat more leafy greens and
supplementing with Knack and a cysteine
both of which can support glutathione
production and detoxification and worked
to reduce my mercury levels
comprehensive lab testing like this is
so important for health and while I've
been doing it for years I've always
found it to be overly complicated and
expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the tests done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function function health.com huberman
function currently has a weight list of
over 250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to huberman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to function
we were on to the fact that sperm counts
are dropping there's a relationship to
anogenital distance and there's a
relationship between anogenital distance
and Thal exposure yeah and then I asked
the question you know okay we're hearing
about sperm counts dropping but is it
functionally relevant are is that one of
the reasons why fertility is dropping
and we've also got the female side where
we've got women with elevated androgens
so we can talk about that a little bit
later but um and then of course we have
the socio uh the
sociobiology uh piece where people are
opting out um or it's also economics in
some cases um opting out of having kids
right um so let's go back to sperm count
because we haven't really talked about
that it's a kind of a different path
and my introduction into phalates was
not through sperm count right it was
through this question of my colleague
ask me you know you should look at this
and challenged and I looked at it and
that was really really interesting
Journey that I went on okay so that but
there was a separate for a while Journey
that I was on and that started in the
late 1990s when um I was asked to join a
committee of the National Academy of
Sciences
and that committee was assembled to look
at the question of
whether hormonally active chemicals
endocrine disrupting chemicals in the
environment posed a threat to human
health because at that time it was like
well yeah we hear about this but should
we care right and
so that
committee wanted to consider a study
that had come out of Denmark a few years
earlier which claimed that sperm count
had dropped 50% in 50 years wow that's a
huge drop that's what we're seeing worse
than that by the way now so okay they
said to me I was the only statistician
on the panel would you look at this and
see if we need to consider this in our
deliberations and as I mentioned I'm
skeptical and I looked at it and I
thought H I don't think so
that was my initial reaction and that
was
because first of all I didn't know who
had written this I just saw it in a
journal and and it was not very big and
not very many figures not very much data
and I thought of it and I thought that's
that's a big claim for a little little
paper you know um but I'll look at it
because it's important and so what I did
then was to think about all the fact
factors that we epidemiologists call
confounders things that might have
caused that decline if it wasn't real
biologically right and so we could think
of some of them together um you know
maybe the method of counting sperm had
changed so that later methods counted
fewer sperm in the same sample that's
certainly possible right um but it
turned out that wasn't the case cuz they
actually had all used the same method
um and maybe the men had changed so
maybe there's a you can't get a sperm
count at random you have to get somebody
to volunteer right so who were these men
were they very different you know in the
early part of the study and the late
part of the study in a way that maybe in
the late part of the study there were
men with lower sperm gut and they were
more concerned you
know maybe they were more obese that's
pretty plausible obesity is related to
se sperm Camp fertility
um and maybe they smoked more and maybe
and so on and so forth right so what I
did was to get the 61 studies go through
them and try to extract information on
all the factors that could explain the
decline so I created a multivariable
model and ran that
model and to my
astonishment when I was done
the slope of the decline was exactly the
same to the first decimal
place it had not explained anything and
I was like oh my God this looks like it
might be real and and for those
listening what Dr Swan is describing is
being the excellent scientist that she
is she went and looked for all the
things that could impact the result that
were not related to what the main
conclusion
seemed to be which is that sperm counts
were going down over time right right
and uh this is really important um to
because I think what we're talking about
here in parallel to the main
conversation is how to do really great
science especially in human populations
that are out there living you know some
of these men probably you know smoke
some cannabis I'm not saying that
reduces sperm count it might reduce
sperm amount mot motility however we
covered that in the podcast now that all
the Cannabis folks go well uh you know
so and so got so and so pregnant when
they were doing swing a lot of weed and
I always say okay well there are a
number of other factors right you know
but alcohol there's um frequency of
ejaculation right the the requirement to
abstain for 48 to 72 to hours to up to
five days prior you know Etc all all
these these factors that men may or may
not Faithfully report but you assume
that if some are telling the truth and
some aren't that there's an equal
distribution of that so all the
different things right right this is so
very different than looking at for
instance um ovarian reserve like the the
number of eggs where you use ultrasound
and you use amh levels and um sure
things can impact that but it's a little
different than when taking uh sperm
counts so thank you for doing the the
studies so carefully and for repeating
them so many times I mean many of the
studies that you've done are are um you
you've done followup on these sperm
count studies across multiple years you
know as you said the first study was in
1992 then you did one in 2017 then there
was one again there was an update I
noticed online so you are extremely
thorough you and and it probably
reflects your um early training in math
and statistics and probability Theory
you're not somebody to just kind of go
in and go oh yeah like in these people
that eat a few too much of this then
there's a little bit less of that so I
just wanted um if today's discussion
feels like we're really um we're Laing
through this um that's intentional um
and it's important for people to hear
these these kinds of um claims are not
the sort of thing that you could people
make them all over all over the board
but work like this needs to be done um
with an extremely meticulous eye and
consideration of all the variables well
good scientific method yeah yeah yeah
and I would say especially with human
epidemiological work because of the
number of potential confounding
variables right right so so when I saw
that and actually did another study to
select my own studies and not accept her
61 studies that had been published that
Elizabeth Carlson had published uh so
new studies came up to more recent times
went back further um did it again found
exactly the same thing okay so there
were three you know three looks at that
and I thought okay I'm going to accept
this now this is sperm count is
declining and
why I turned to the why okay because up
and down now we hadn't said anything
about why we just said is it doing that
yes okay if it now we believe it is
declining why and so then I thought
quite a lot and talked to people and
ruled out genetics because it was too
fast it's two generations it's too fast
50 years two generations so if it's not
genetics then it's environment and so
what is it about the environment that
could do this so I asked
okay in the
environment there could be things that
are making sperm decline so if you think
about how you might look at that you
might design the study that I designed
next which was another study and by the
way this preceded the AGD so it just so
we had four cities in the United States
that we picked with different
environments and then we got men to come
in and we used the same equipment at
each place we used the same method of
selection them selecting the man the
tech technicians were trained centrally
at UC Davis we had very good quality
control so samples were sent around
every quarter to make sure that
everybody was measuring things the same
way we didn't want drift right and then
we got their urine um and that's how I
had those urine samples so if you wanted
to do this study and you wanted to get a
representative sample of
men where would you go because you can't
I can't ask a guy in the street to give
me a SE sample right I mean it's not
it's not something you get very you know
so I thought how can I get a
representative
sample and which would teach me
something about a larger population
called the parent population so here's a
sample it should represent the parent so
how do I ensure that and what I decided
was to sample partners of pregnant women
because pregnant women all come to
Medical Care almost all and if their
Partners will give a seaman sample then
we have a representative sample and when
we know what we're looking at so that's
what we did so this is a the Seaman
study is the study of Partners of
pregnant women and um and of course
they'll have slightly higher SE quality
because they got their partner pregnant
but um and so we had their urine we had
their blood and um we looked at their
semen quality and then we decided to
look at pesti pdes and the reason we
look at
pesticides um was because there was a
lot of gradation across our for centers
in pesticide use and what we found was
really extraordinary that men who were
living in Central Missouri where I was
living at the time who were in the
middle of a agricultural belt where
there was spraying all the time for
soybeans and so on um those men had half
as many moving sperms
as men in
Minneapolis whoa
whoa huge right and then we went one
step further and within Missouri we
looked at a sample of men who had very
high sperm parameters and very low sperm
parameters and showed that five
pesticides were significantly higher in
the men with the low sperm parameters
that include motility morphology you
know all app so these are pesticides
that are being sprayed in the air on
crops you mentioned soybeans what other
what other types of crops I don't know
okay I don't remember so so plant and
fruit crops presum was yeah whatever
whatever they were growing in Columbia
Missouri at that time and and just to
make sure I understand that it's not
that the men corn and soybeans corn and
soybeans but we're not talking about
eating corn and soybeans we're talking
about living in an area where pesticides
are being used by
is it is it still called dust crop yeah
we didn't go into how they got these we
just looked in their urine and there
were the metabolized the metabolists
don't get in their urine unless they
were exposed exposed through the air or
exposed by eating corn and soybeans we
don't know we don't know okay we don't
know um but this was not a particularly
you know we didn't we didn't sample
Farmers Only or anything like that so
whoever came into the remember how we
got these men their wives were pregnant
they were having prenatal care at the
University of Missouri so that's where
we got them whoever happened to come in
to the prenatal clinic and agree to be
in our study they're the male you know
urine M's urine was measured for for
these pesticides I'm sure a number of
people including myself are
wondering in what other products are
these five pesticides present um are
these commonly used pesticides or is it
something about they were they're called
the the iine pesticides atrazine is was
the most widely used and it's a huge use
around the world I mean it's highly you
know one of the most the largest
commercial pesticides um so these were
very big players in the pesticide field
a relevant um theme there would be uh
maybe we could take a moment and talk
about atraid and its effect on uh male
sexual behavior in amphibia and we'll
come um come back to the the the sperm
cies because um when I was a graduate
student at UC Berkeley I had the
wonderful experience of taking a course
from the now I think you mentioned he's
Aden there are multiple Deans on
campuses Tyrone Hayes is a wonderful
researcher um who established a link
through his research between atrazine
exposure and um male sexual behavior of
amphibia yes could you elaborate on that
result yeah so Tyrone first caught frogs
in the wild uh in environments that were
more or less exposed to atrazine and
showed effects on development and sexual
behavior then he in his lab he actually
exposed them so he knew exactly who was
exposed and how much and he showed that
the and I can't tell you what percent or
what you know but a significant number
of frogs exposed to this pesticide
atrazine chose to mate with other male
frogs tried to mate with other male
frogs presumably unsuccessfully well
they CL they mounted them he has photos
of the male males mounting males and so
presumably this is a neural change that
occurred neuroendocrine change but
ultimately neural since mounting
behavior is controlled by actually we
now know the the um hypothalamic nuclei
that control this David Anderson who's
been on this podcast has people in his
laboratory that including a former
graduate student of mine um
uh working on on this specific issue of
what the what the the circuitry um is
um that's a remarkable result it's been
kind of
um you know used and misused out there
in the in the in the media and in
popular culture um but if nothing else
it suggests that the organization of the
neural circuits and neuroendocrine
Pathways that control
um sexual I don't want to say part like
because his mating thing this the frogs
aren't monogamous but um uh sexual
preference are um significantly impacted
by this by this atrazine yes and and it
suggests that that there other
environmental chemicals can as well and
we I don't know how if we'll have time
to go there but I did work on
neurodevelopmental outcomes in relation
to prenatal phid exposure and so I think
the overarching idea here is that the
brain like the genitals is sexually
dimorphic and there's many people by the
way who will take offense at that really
yeah I think there's I mean going back
to the the work of Frank Beach and the
psychology department at UC Berkeley I
know um showed this in beagles it's been
it's been shown in pretty much every
species tell but it's not a better worse
I think this is what people need to hear
like dimorphic does not mean better
worse it means different right right and
that there and there are for example
advantages to
spatial
um reasoning in a male that which are
related to testosterone you right you
know that so I mean I think there yeah I
mean my understanding of this literature
and I'm not an expert in this particular
aspect which is the behavioral
phenotypes but you know like the meteor
preoptic area of the hypothalamus is
known to be sexually dimorphic dependent
on testosterone converted into estrogen
during development etc etc and there's
just so much evidence of this um how it
links to behaviors is can I think can be
reasonably placed into um ethologically
relevant um uh evolutionarily logical um
arguments when talking about rodents or
beagles or even reesus macak monkeys I
think where people get um a bit inflamed
is when people try and take the sexual
dimorphisms have been observed in animal
brains or in even in human brains and
Tack those to specific abilities or or
or lesser abilities I think that's when
people sort of go wait a second like I
have much better sense of direction than
my husband and you go well yeah like you
know and then you go well does that mean
that she has higher testosterone than
him and then maybe and then and pretty
soon you're you're in uh almost at no
man's land a no person's land of of of
comp of confounding variables right but
I really appreciate that you raised this
and also that you said it and I didn't
because I I feel safer that way but look
there is a a very
simple outdated questionnaire and it's
play Behavior it's called the psai it's
been used for years have you I don't if
Rough and Tumble play yes yeah yes and
there are 24 questions on there and they
are
sexually goric I guess you could say
that there you know my child likes to
play with dolls my child likes to play
dress up my child likes to play rough
and tumble uh Etc and we gave that
questionnaire to our
population um and looked at the
answers uh that the mothers gave both in
our population by the way and a Swedish
population of a colleague there uh Carl
borag and Gustav borag and and um what
we
found higher thite levels these
anti-androgenic phics were Expos you
know associated with
less masculine male typical play in our
male
boys so this is thid exposure to the to
the mom baby is born in the young human
child four four yeah four year I think
it was four years of age four years of
age less Rough and Tumble type play
that's right among the boys whose
mothers were exposed to Mor phalates
during a critical period of
development now you can see that's a
politically loaded issue now I mean you
know yeah well I think we're I mean
let's let's let's have some fun with
this in in in the scientific
sense the the notion of dimorphism is
you know okay male and female brains are
different right which and male female
defined in those almost all those
studies as presence of a y chromosome
and then people say well there's some
there's x y y and then there's XX y okay
but most of the time you're talking
about XX chromosome or X why chromosomes
at Birth forget everything else for the
moment these are always distributions
this is what I think people need to know
we're not talking about these are not
this is not uh you know two hills of
data separated by a valley these are
overlapping distributions right right so
you get males with a quote unquote
female likee distribution you get
females with a quote unquote maleik
distribution and I think as long as we
acknowledge that then we're just talking
statistics right we're not we're not
placing any cultural or um any value on
it really whatsoever right but but if
you you could make the analog to the
inter gental distance it's kind of
similar you know you have the same
exposure salid exposure you have
something changed statistically we don't
see huge differences in the boys
genitals uh and and we don't see huge I
don't we know these kids have not been
scan so we don't know how their brains
look but based on their answers we don't
see huge differences we see tenant we
see they are more
likely if they had been exposed to these
stots to want to play dress up and have
tea parties more likely doesn't mean
that they're all going to but that's the
direction and so on so I think we have
to just think about more likely not
absolute yeah and of course there are
also the the sociobiological variables
such as um if a young boy has a sibling
that's a sister there's more lik be
dressed as right she's if he has two
older brothers there might be more Rough
and Tumble play happening in the house
and I have some friends that are women
who have older brothers and those women
are uh you know some of them roll
Jiu-Jitsu or do you know and I know some
women who are only children who do
martial arts and and and fight right you
know so so I think that um none of this
is deterministic right as we know I but
but let me just add we did control for
the sex of The Sibling older sibling and
we also asked about the parents attitude
just toward same-sex play so what would
how would you feel if your child your
male child played with dolls would you
be discouraging would you encourage
because it has a lot to do with what's
in the house you know if you say did
your child play with dolls well what
what if there were no dolls this is
super interesting to me I I don't want
to reveal too much but I um just because
it's not it's just an N of one but I
grew up in a household where I have a
sister but then after a certain age I
received very strong messages about what
sorts of um play were um were gender
appropriate um and I think I also just
naturally defaulted to there were a
bunch of boys that lived in my
neighborhood they had older sisters so
all the sisters hung out together it's
kind of interesting and all the the
younger brothers pretty much hung out
together and the the guys that weren't
didn't have siblings or had Brothers for
siblings so there was a really strong
Divergence but I grew up in the SE that
was in the 70s and early ' 80s when
things were let's just say culture was
more dimorphic then clearly right I mean
there were television shows like All in
the Family which the entire basis of the
show was the wife going back to work and
the husband being confused about I mean
nowadays people will go like what that's
wild I have to ask because I know people
are wondering and I'm wondering what are
some non-pesticide
sources of
phalates that um we have agency over
that we can take control over right so
let me ju correct you it's not that
sources of phalates necessarily
pesticides there are phalates in
pesticides um but that's not the worst
player in um the in the story if you
look at the different classes
of exposures that are hormonally active
right pesticides are phalates are
bisphenols like bisphenol a BPA BPA
certain metals are there's a posos
chemicals there's all these different
classes right and if we want to go
excuse me into what in our daily life
exposes us to these things that's
another story that um we we can talk
about but they're going to be different
depending on the class right so let's um
throw our arms around all of those for
the moment and I'll just ask you given
that you're an expert in this area
what are the top three to five sources
of endocrine
disruptors that we have agency over and
let's forget about pregnancy for the
moment since we're all out of the womb
if we're listening to this um some
people will be pregnant as they listen
to it but um would you say it's you know
drinking out of plastic bottles is it
laundry detergent um is it you know
rubber tires that are cascading down on
us through the air and we're in ing them
I mean presumably all of the above but
what are which ones that we have agency
over do you think are the most let's
just say concerning where people could
make better
choices um I would say foodborn
exposures exposures in the food in the
food packaging in the food storage in
the food in the cooking of
utensils um we can go through the
various things but um
we're doing that all the time you know
we're eating all the time we're getting
food into into us and these are bringing
in in a very you know in a way that we
have some control over some agency over
uh you know we can make changes in our
Foods um very close to that is drink you
know food and beverage um
so
I first of all I've talked about this a
lot I've written about it in my book I'm
also as you know involved in a movie
where in the movie that might be a good
time to talk about that what what we do
in the movie the movie is about
six couples that are
infertile okay they haven't been able to
conceive in 12 months that's the
definition and um then a company that I
work with a million marker out of
Berkeley has a trained staff that
interviews them not only them but anyone
who signs into to this company
interviews them and ask them what they
use what do they use for their faal
facial care what do they use for their
shampoo what do they use for their
cleaning products and their laundry
detergent and their what do they store
their food in and on and on and on so
this's this long inventory that they
take of all products that people are
aware of using okay and um based on that
we identify
likely bad players in the list so how we
do that is another you know we can talk
about that later but um then in the film
and in this little It's actually an
experiment that I designed and we're
called an intervention and we are then
intervening in their exposures by
changing out these things that they told
us so we will tell them you know don't
use any product with fragrance for
example that's a major source of
exposure to Thad any product any
fragrance product if fragrance is no
perfume no lotions soap with fragrance
right even essential oil fragrances like
essal oil is a tricky right it's a mix
it's a mix yeah so I I'm I'm going to
that's guarded but but anything you know
spray deodorants roll on deodorant
laundry detergent yep in shamp and any
if you can smell it it's probably
affecting your
hormones I'm so happy about this answer
not because I have any steak in any
company related to fragrance free stuff
but I I I've a very strong sense of
smell and I um either love or hate
smells and I hate synthetic smells like
going through the dutyfree especially in
a European airport where with all the
perfumes and I'm just I was going to
hold my breath it it feels like I'm
breathing poison I know um uh well well
you are actually yeah yeah yeah in some
sense most soaps right yeah um super
interesting so that's your primary
intervention is to tell them get rid of
anything with fragrances no it's only
one thing we get rid of so then we we
talk about how the Plastics that they
use to store their food food storage
containers try to get them to get rid of
those if they're made of plastic we try
to get them to get rid of their um
non-stick pans because of the posos
chemicals that are in those and and so
on and so forth so we go through all
steps of their life and try to tell them
how to make changes that will reduce
their exposure but presumably also um
changes like if if uh the man is obese
for instance you might have him walking
a bit more no you don't touch any of
that well you see Andrew if we did that
we would be mixing up two interventions
we would be mixing up an obesity
intervention I see this is a study I I'm
sorry I thought that this group is uh is
missioned with um helping couples get
pregnant no no this is how this is a
study to look at what happens if you
make these product related changes great
just product related changes exactly
exactly we would love to do and probably
will do another study separate one on
Obesity and you know a lot of these
chemicals just to let you know are
obesogens they increase obesity there's
a book out called obesogens you can read
about them and so you know it'll be it's
very you know there is some overlap so
by reducing some of these chemicals that
are in your food storage containers
you're also reducing obesogens so it's
not a clear you know yes no we gave them
a box each couple I went to their house
six couples around the United say with a
big box and in this box are these
alternative products and um so you know
straws and and and bamboo spoons and you
know $500 per box I think it was
approximately it had to do with their
personal you know exposure and and then
they made these changes now
unlike another study that you reported
they are at the end quite happy to keep
doing this by the way they love this
they love doing this it was so
gratifying to see that they felt in many
many ways their life got better you know
I'm not a I'm I'm pretty careful in what
I so I I hesitate to say this because
the data is not hard but the impression
is that they are
happy happier they're sleeping better
they report more energy and so on and so
forth uh having made these changes we
need to follow that up with hard data
I'm not writing that I'm not you know
but that they but I can say and I can
write that they felt very positive and
are we're going to go back and see if
they did continue we need to do that but
at the end of the six of the 3 months
they and hopefully in six months they
will they are still making these changes
in their lives did um you collect data
on whether or not they were able to
conceive after having made these changes
yes we did but I actually can't talk
about that can't talk about until the
babies are born just kidding um um and
and we did get their sperm count at the
beginning and the end and and had some
very interesting data on that which too
early to report to too too early let me
ask you this then and um I appreciate
that the not wanting to share specific
uh results until this the all the data
are in and it's published
um if somebody listening uh were having
trouble conceiving um for 12 months or
more um are the sorts of replacement
intervention product interventions that
you're talking about here things that
you would um at least feel comfortable
saying um would might be a good place to
start or to explore absolutely
absolutely there's no harm you know we
we're not none of the changes are
putting people at risk or doing anything
that could be harmful them I'm sure of
that very careful and some are are going
to be cost-saving um I think that's
where like drinking out of uh plastic
bottles far less if at all like I um
just for reasons related to wanting to
reduce waste I I use a mason jar or use
these or ceramic although you'll
probably tell me that the lining on the
ceramic mug might have endocrine
disruptors no I okay great okay well
then I'll keep drinking um but it's very
reassuring to me that there are things
that we can do in terms of cost-saving
elimination or replacement of of
consumables buying in bulk that can
improve endocrine status maybe fertility
buy in bulk um bring a container to the
store and fill it up a glass jar instead
of buying something in plastic you're
winning on both ends because those bulk
products are cheaper MH um one of the
things I did with the couples was go
shop with them and we went around and we
looked at various products and for
example we looked at the produce and
there was option to buy
freestanding Bunches of lettuce heads of
lettuce or wrapped up in plastic Bunches
of lettuce and I said let's compare the
price I actually didn't know until we
did it but the freestanding unwrapped
lettuce was
cheaper and I think that's you know
because that makes sense because there's
a work involved in wrapping it up and in
the container and so on and so not only
are you getting something that's more
toxic but it's more expensive when it
comes to reducing PA exposure and some
of these forever chemicals um that you
mentioned um seems like reducing uh
fluid intake from plastic vessels is
going to be number one the primary
source of BPA is in the lining of cans
so any drink or soup or anything that
comes in a can is going to be um any can
all can any can unless it's a high-end
you know Elite company that's made the
change from BPA to an alternative lining
and they'll say that so and by the way
BPA has some bad relatives um such as
BPS and BPF and and maybe you're be
interested in this story so when it came
out that BPA was um estrogenic which is
what it is um and by the way it's kind
of the evil twin of phalates because
phalates are anti-androgenic and B is
estrogenic and phalates make plastic
soft and BPA makes plastic hard you
don't want either okay so when this came
out that this was a bad thing um the
manufacturer started selling things that
say BPA free I'm sure you've seen that
the trick is that instead of BPA they
use BPS sneaky rat and
BPF and these are chemicals these are
lookalikes they're analoges and they're
just as harmful sneaky sneaky sneaky so
I'm not a conspiracy theorist but it's
just so dirty it's so dirty it's like
it's um you know right now is a really
important time to be having this
discussion because there's been a lot of
movement on Capitol Hill and there's
been a lot of movement on social media
about trying to call attention to
metabolic syndromes and highly processed
foods and and issues like this and it's
become unfortunately politicized I
mean I hear this stuff and I just think
to myself the only good faith um that we
can really trust is our own desire to be
healthier and um to have our families
and friends be healthier and to try and
consume and not consume things on the
basis of that that my belief is that we
can't trust any any larger agency to
either protect or harm us it's like it's
not it's it's like they're going to do
what they're going to do we just have to
be informed as opposed to trying to like
dismantle the systems that led to this
which just seems like infinitely
complicated
um maybe you can do that but I'm far
less optimistic and now that I'm 49
years old I can say things like now that
I'm 49 I feel like um but what you're
saying is really important if I look at
a can it says BPA free doesn't mean
anything it could have bps's or other uh
endocrine disruptors right so drinking
out of glass vessels um drinking out of
um ceramic vessels um metal metal but
not cans not metal cans not aluminum
cans right not cans no good but okay you
know you can get a a metal water bottle
that's not lined with BPA steel steel
yeah steel yeah and um is it true that
microwave safe means it just means that
the plastic won't melt in the microwave
but it's do never never put plastic in a
microwave so here's the story The BPA
phids plasticizers are added to the
plastic but they're not chemically bound
to it okay so if you put anything in a
container that has these chemical in it
they will and then put it in a hot
environment they will come out of the
plastic and go into the
food so if you in a microwave or you put
your bottle in the car and the Sun comes
in it warms up the bottle and then the
stuff goes into your water you don't
want to mix these chemical and your food
but if you do the worst thing is to do
it in a heated environment I think about
all the the food that was consumed in
college in the in the 90s and 2000s like
uh the cup of noodles with the styrofoam
the um you know things in packaging
stuff like that is pretty
straightforward to eliminate once one
understands and decides then we start
getting into the more nuanced thing of
like okay you can buy a really nice
tasting anyway grass-fed grass finish
steak but it's wrapped in
plastic well or you can go to the
butcher but most people don't have time
to go to the butcher or you can get um
strawberries at the farmers market
blueberries at the farmers market which
is what I try to do but sometimes I buy
strawberries at the market and they have
those plastic flip top things and of
course I recycle the plastic how bad is
it if you know you rinse the
strawberries off with good clean water
that were in the plastic container are
you we have to do that experiment I
don't know yeah
so I guess so it sounds to me like um
not drinking out of cans not drinking
out of plastic bottles it's going to be
not microwaving plastic ever and in
general just avoiding avoiding plastic
intake if you can afford it buy organic
so you're going to avoid the pesticides
and then phalates are actually added to
pesticides and they're added because
they increase absorption so you know the
you want your pesticides to get into the
plant right and to kill the bad stuff
and and insects and and um so the same
property of phalates that makes them
good for pesticides also makes them good
for our hand cream just mentioning
absorption absorption anything that's
absorbed in the body is going to have
phades in it and it also holds scent and
color so it's added to those scents and
it's also added to your lipstick and to
your colored you know whatever you put
on face and so on anything that holds
scent and color that's going to be
th um sorry I've been accused on line
and uh of being a sunscreen truther I'm
not a sunscreen truther I'm going to
keep repeating this as many times as I
can I I understand that UV damage to the
skin can cause certain cancers I get
that um I agree with that um the data
are pretty clear to me based on having
researched this pretty extensively and
talked to many many people including
Derm oncologists that mineral-based
sunscreens like zinc oxide and titanium
dioxide but certainly zinc oxide are
safer than the chemical sunscreens a lot
of people get upset when I say that and
they say well in Europe there's tons of
evidence that the chemical based
sunscreens are safe okay fine you use
them I'm not going to the point being
that UV damage is
bad there are ways to prect protect
ourselves from the Sun including
physical barriers like clothing hats
Etc um but pretty much all sunscreen
that I'm aware of is designed to be
absorbed so what do we do if we want to
get some UV protection from whatever
kind of sunscreen we deem safe for
ourselves but we want to avoid these
exposures to these other things what
what do we do do we have to hunt really
carefully for the right
sunscreen uh yeah I I think that's a
good idea um are you familiar with
environmental working group uh is
another one out of the Bay Area no oh
okay I don't know actually where they
are they're pretty big sounds sounds
familiar but I'm not I can't say I'm
familiar with they have Consumer Guides
and in those consumer so environmental
working group I'm not part of them I'm
you know but I like their work and in
these Consumer Guides you can put in the
product and they have categories you can
put sunscreen if we had time we could do
it right now but and then you can put
the name of your sunscreen and it'll
give you a number and then if the number
is less than 10 it'll tell you why are
they in independent of any like funding
of that question will probably come up
for you too um uh people will say where
did she get her funding you know people
people get very suspicious about this I
can tell you yeah that would be great
yeah so I uh am a a tenure professor at
Mount Si get some salary there because
I'm only part-time and I have a funer
one funer who funds found funded my um
sperm decline uh second sperm decline
analysis and the publicity of my book so
he's a he's a it's a foundation I won't
says philanthropy yes philanthropy yeah
and it's actually not a lot of money so
no And so there's no reason to think
that anything that you're telling us is
um linked to like the food industry or
an alternative product or anything I'm
very very careful not to endorse any
product because I don't want that
complication yeah thanks for clarifying
that I wasn't I wasn't suspicious but um
but I think nowadays people have just
been taught to you know appropriately so
they've been taught to say well wait
where does this funding come from
because a lot of the studies about the
that led to the F food pyramid for
instance people were under the
impression that somehow that was biased
by by companies that were funding the
work and I don't know I haven't done the
forensics on that I don't have the time
or the energy um all I know is that um
when it comes to what people eat what it
comes when it comes to what people put
on their body it becomes a very personal
thing and it's woven in with a lot of um
psychological and emotional issues yeah
yeah okay
um what are a few things that you
do Andor
avoid in light of what you know about
these endocrine disruptors and by the
way it goes without saying that you're
in spectacular cognitive and physical
shape uh for any age but it's it's
really remarkable I I feel comtable
sharing this because someone else
published it online recently you are
soon to enjoy your what birthday 89th
89th birthday amazing and um with all
the talk about longevity cognitive and
physical longevity everyone's thinking
including me like what does she do well
she avoids all these endocrine
disruptors um and she has a wonderfully
rich life of curiosity and other things
um but yeah what are some other things
that you do uh and and avoid in light of
what you know for which there may or may
not be a control old study but I think
we're all just curious we'll frame this
as what you do so water our water I
worry about the water I studied water
for a long time in my past life so we
actually distill our water so we have a
tabletop
distiller um my husband Steven cleans it
out there's a lot of gunk in it by the
way even though it's San Francisco that
has clean water at the end of the day
after you've distilled the water there's
a lot of gun so you distill the water so
this is not reverse osmosis distilling
okay yeah so it's steamed distilled and
then it condenses in a glass container
and then we put that in glass containers
in the fridge and so and it tastes
really good by the way really really
somebody was just over and and he said
this tastes like melted snow I thought
it was lovely and you use that for
drinking for coffee for tea for cooking
too if you make rice you're using
distill actually no no but for ice cubes
and you know whenever I can think about
it we can't use too much cuz you be too
busy always but he does it once a day
that it's just the two of us so water is
important um we try to leave our shoes
at the door tell me about that one well
dust that you bring in um contains a lot
of the particularly the posos chemicals
and uh so that's actually um I'm not
100% good on that but we try try to do
that um and I'm careful with the
products I put on my face I check them
out the way I suggested you know
environmental working group um and I go
to the farmers market I always buy
organic always buy organic um but I know
that's a cost issue for some people um
and an availability issue for some
people but I in San Francisco you can do
that
um some areas where I don't do more of
what I should I think I'm starting to be
aware of the
um chemicals and clothing we haven't
talked about that but um there's a turns
out there's a lot of particularly in
it's a problem for workout wear because
you're absorbing so much you're sweaty
you're hot and you're bringing these
chemicals into your body and that may be
one of the interventions that we do uh
get a bunch of athletes to use
um safe clothing and and traditional
clothing and see what their body burden
is that's how you know so um airing
toward cotton as AO as opposed to
synthetic material right right and the
dyes are important so you you don't want
you want maybe plant-based dyes it's not
my area of expertise I have a colleague
who I work with on this and I'll go with
her advice but but um I'm just saying
that's another area that I think people
will soon be paying attention to um
there's also the area that is much more
difficult which is what's in building
materials and Furniture but um a lot of
these posos and the tens are in our
furniture and in our building materials
and trying to think about how to build I
was asked about safety in a new Village
that's being built in California by the
way and um it's really challenging to
think about if you were going to do this
right and you were going to build a town
that was toxic free how would you do
that I'm thinking about that I'm
thinking about the opener of The
Simpsons and doing the exact opposite
where like in the opener of the The
Simpsons there's like a three-eyed fish
and there's the the chemical plant and
I'm just thinking you just look at the
opener of The Simpsons you do the
inverse of everything that's
there the inverse of everything that's
there including alcohol intake um uh you
know which is um robust on The Simpsons
um yeah right but it interesting so and
when it comes
to food sourcing like of but non-fruit
non-vegetable food sourcing is there
anything we can do I mean it's so hard
for people to get eggs from farms I mean
you can if you go to a farmers's market
but this stuff can get pretty tricky
pretty expensive and most people
listening are not not going to be you
know living in somoma where they might
have a a neighbor that has chickens or
something yeah um it's it's it's a hard
problem it is a hard problem and and I
think maybe people asking for it more
would help I don't know I mean in San
Francisco I'm lucky because I can just
get you know just on the phone
fresh direct order the and I know it's
okay um but um I know that's not the
case everywhere so um I think being
aware honestly is a really big step if
you're aware that this is something you
want to change you will find ways to
change it it's interesting because a few
years back there was a lot of discussion
about dyes in uh children's toys in
particular toys um from overseas right
remember kids are not you know babies
are always gnawing on stuff and teeing
and and and there was a lot of attention
like hey like what's in these sippy cups
and my understanding is uh toys and
sippy cups and my understanding is that
bpas were banned from sippy cups thit
excuse me based on my work based on your
work thank you so much thank you for the
clarification truly and and for and for
the work that led to that um we we have
this um innate thankfully uh innate
reflex to protect our young as does
every most every species um thank
goodness and we know that baby skin is
more absorbent than older skin we know
and so there there are literally laws in
place and restrictions in place to make
sure that some this stuff is minimized
in young kids but then we sort of after
age 12 we're kind of like okay well it's
a free-for-all it depends on your budget
where you go and so we we can't rely on
governing bodies to to do this um but I
think it's a useful conversation
especially given your relationship to um
Scandinavia which is a fun one to
elaborate on to
illustrate some of the discrepancy
between the US and
Europe what sorts of chemicals are
banned in Europe in food in lotion Etc
that you're aware of that are prominent
here in the US maybe that's a good
filter to to place some of this Choice
making through Europe has a has had a
policy called reach and under
reach you have to show that a chemical
is safe before it's put into the
marketplace not so what the way our
system is here is put in the marketplace
and then if somebody gets worried about
it they might do a study they might find
harm remember how long it took me to
find that thide connection it was 10
years two studies 10 years $10 million
by the way so if you're going to wait
for that I don't know what you know
given the number of chemicals out there
80,000 or more um forget it you know so
so I think the reach policy of testing
before something's put in the market is
making a big difference in Europe and
that's I think that's one reason why
they're much better off are those are
those animal tests um or animal and
human tests that they're doing over
there whatever defin safety it depends
on the chemical it depends on you know
what the product is I I can't answer
that in general but so that be a good
Avenue for changing legislature here
right to to install something similar to
reach absolutely but it's not going to
happen I don't think no no because
there's too many forces against that
it's very very hard for manufacturers to
make changes I I'll give you one
example um so you know that you might
not know but should know that thids are
very prevalent in the hospital setting
there're if you think of a tube you know
to to dialysis to chemotherapy to IV
that's all PL that's all phids right and
that's going into your body and there
was a recently um a bill passed in
California that DP could not be in IV
bags it's
fantastic success in the actual bag yes
the bags could not contain these
endocrine disruptors yes DP specifically
dehp diyl hexalite the most
anti-androgenic Thal so so that was a
great step for for but that's like one
chemical
right in one product and that was a
battle so you see how hard it is to do
this extremely hard there's a company
bbrw which makes Hospital products and
they are very forward-thinking and they
set up a a factory in Florida to make
alternative IV bags out of another
product um poly oan and and the problem
is that we're not sure about the safety
of polyphant so it's a it gets really
difficult you know you can say remove
dhp but now we scientists have to say
what does it mean for a chemical to be
safe and we don't know that I don't mean
to dissolution you and your your listen
you know that's a that's a huge
challenge that we're up against we know
it's safer we know it's safer and we
know what the Bad actors are and we know
things we don't want to be exposed to
but we have to be careful when we think
about what do we want to put in
instead is that yeah yeah I I'm thinking
about this a former um president of
Stamford who was also happen to be a
family friend years ago um he since
passed Don Kennedy when he retired as
president Stanford went in my
understanding is that he went and
directed the FDA and I was just thinking
to myself like um when did thisen happen
um because I know he was super into
Health he was like an avid Runner he was
very fit well into his 70s yeah hit
replacement kept running or maybe it was
knee replacement I don't know the guy
was obsessed with health and so I don't
think that um there's there's a lack of
interest in health at the level of
things like the FDA and um but there's
clearly a problem and I'm just trying to
think of solutions and it seems to all
boil down to
what we can take control of in our home
like when we go to a restaurant it's
challenging to know like what they're
doing in the kitchen and and and at some
point it becomes neurotic to you know
although I know people that won't go to
restaurants where they use seed oils
there's this whole new thing cropping up
about avoiding seed oils um but maybe uh
they they're more significant issues who
knows um the seed oil crowd is pretty
pretty intense um and I like olive oil
anyway so I air to that but I think if
people are interested Ed in limiting
their exposure to these endocrine
disruptors one of the key questions
that's going to come up again and again
especially in light of PCOS and sperm
counts
is we can't control what happened to us
during pregnancy right but once we have
some sense of agency over what we put
into our body and how we put it into our
body do you think that there's
a that there's um plasticity and
resilience to this system so you know
God forbid if somebody was exposed to a
lot of these things early on can they
you know by making changes can they can
they rescue themselves to any degree no
so it's really just dependent on what
your parents did yes that's not to say
that your own exposure cannot change
things further and make things worse but
here here's a here's a fact if a male's
mother smokes when he's in the womb then
he has a this is a Danish study by the
way 50% reduction in sperm count if his
mother smoke while he was in the womb
how much smoking are we talking I don't
know I don't remember but the the the
reason I bring this up is because
there's nothing he can do to change
that okay if he smokes as an adult he
has I think a similar reduction the
sperm count he can stop and his sperm
will be res restored he can get a sperm
Health back but whatever happened in the
womb stays in the womb if you will it's
developmental it's not going to you know
it's going to be be there for life and
that's true of the brain as well so um I
think anybody who's thinking of
conceiving a
pregnancy or
pregnant has a responsibility to really
learn how to reduce their exposure
because these things are by the way
passed on for several Generations it's
your child and your child's child
because this germ cells for your
grandchild are going to be carried in
within your child so germ cell are um
not germs as in infectious germs it's
the cells that will produce the egg and
sperm that germinate hence hence the
word germ right so it's a huge
responsibility and I think people should
take it very seriously um that they have
you know they're going to be affecting
the health of subsequent gener some Labs
say it's seven generations I don't know
if that's true but certainly three
generations um are affected and um so I
should mention my book can I mention
please I'll mention yeah I believe I
mentioned it in my introduction but yeah
please so in in uh countdown uh two
words by the way because if you say
countdown one word you won't find it but
countdown um we have two chapters on
things you can do you very practical
things you can do and also websites you
can go to and links you can go to now
this came out in um a while ago so 21 so
there are many more things now but I
think it's a good start how lonely are
you in this expedition of identifying
endocrine disruptors in food in
pesticides in um in the sorts of things
you're talking about like is there a
whole field of this of of excellent
people are you are you a small team of
of of people that are against the grain
I I mean I confess I don't know many
people doing the sorts of work that
you're doing but I you know you're the
the most public facing and prominent and
um I I
my question is like is the NIH funding a
lot of this sort of thing absolutely
it's we're an army and it's not and it's
International and there is now um a
global um Plastics treaty under
negotiation by the way tell us about the
Plastics treaty people are trying
to create get ped by various countries
um an international Plastics treaty I
can't I don't want to talk a lot about
it I'm not involved in that process but
in the process you they you could see if
you looked into
there hundreds of scientists and
concerned citizens and activists and you
know people in legislation who are
working to specifically on the chemicals
and plastic now plastic is really a bad
actor I I but it is not the only bad
actor so I want to just mention that
plastic is really important but you know
pesticides are not plastic and and and
so on so there are many other classes
that you have to worry about but
certainly controlling our exposure to
plastic is huge and um though you asked
about scientists in this area yes
there's huge amount of science going on
for this in this there's um and it's
funded by NIH and it's funded by um the
EU and um primarily I think those are
the two two funders of Scandinavia has
funding within you know in Scandinavian
countries so there's a lot of work and a
lot of very good people working really
hard but it's a huge problem and it's
been here
since well plastic started to rise in
popularity in 1950 so we have like 75
years to battle against and it's not
going down anytime
soon lifespan is increasing pretty
significantly presumably in large part
because of the red ction and
smoking um and control of Infectious
Disease and Control of infectious
diseases um but lifespan is definitely
increasing um whereas the use of
plastics has clearly increased um and so
uh I guess one could argue that we're
living longer but we are less robust
than we were less um reproductively
competent is that uh the people that are
reflected in that longer lifespan were
not necessarily exposed early in life
which is when it's most critical so you
know I was born in 1936 there was no
plastic then there was no you know um
and there were other things of course
but it not as they are today so um I
don't think that you can make the
inference that because we're living
longer plastic growth you know the
growth of the Plastics industry is
somehow driving that longevity
absolutely not absolutely not I think
what it's driving is decrease in
fertility and what's happening is that
the shift in populations is pretty
dramatic we're getting you know the
pyramid used to be like this I'm I'm
making a triangle with my arms showing
very few people on top and a lot of
people on the bottom but what's
happening is that that's getting
inverted so we're getting more and more
people on top and fewer and fewer people
on the bottom birth rates are way down
birth rats are way down and and so this
is a
an enormous problem for societies
because the people in that small support
group at the bottom can't drive the
society to support the L the
large growth on top you see what saying
is this true in other countries as well
yes absolutely absolutely it's all over
the world and and the decline in
fertility in my mind is probably well
one of the biggest challenges we're
facing now because um it's everywhere
it's very acute and there's only limited
things we can do to to to counter it um
there's a wonderful website called it's
by the World Bank put out by the World
Bank it's called fertility data and if
you go in there you can see what is the
fertility rate every year but you can
put in you know plug in a country or a
year or you and see what the f fertility
rate in each country in the world each
year and you can see that and what you
see is that um a
decline about the same rate as sperm
decline by the way about 50% in 50 years
and um the critical point for fertility
is two so what's that mean that's called
replacement and that's two people
replace themselves with a total
fertility rate of two actually 2.1
because you have a little bit of loss
but 2.1 you're good to go Society when
you fall below that you're
shrinking and there are many countries
in the world that are below that
including the United States and for
example the worst I've seen is actually
South Korea which is at
0.78 wow Japan is at one wow so large
parts of the world are just not
replacing themselves and why that is is
maybe another discussion but or we can
talk about it I don't know if you want
to go go into that but um it's not just
sperm count for sure yeah along those
lines let's talk about egg count and
quality uh you mentioned the PCOS
results earlier um before we were on
Mike uh you mentioned an interesting
study that you did about the use of
electric blankets um and assessing
whether or not the use of electric
blankets had impacted um egg number or
quality in women and the answer was it
actually what we looked at in women I'm
sorry to correct you but was their the
outcome of their pregnancy their
fertility and and what if they got
pregnant how how did that turn out
excuse me so thank you for that
clarification but but um I'm sure there'
be a lot of other studies that have
looked at that you know I I just have
been away from that field for a long
time but so far I don't see convincing
evidence that the use of cell phones or
um you know other exposures to
electromagnetic radiation are affecting
our pregnancies and our fertility that's
not to say it's not happening
but I have not looked at it and I don't
like to make statements about things I
haven't looked at my understanding of
the cell phone data uh for sperm uh
count and motility AKA quality um is I
discussed amended analysis uh covering
this on the podcast previously is that
there are some heat effects of cell
phone use and keeping the phone in the
pocket that may that may I want to be
careful here impact um sperm count and
and motility uh quality but um Direct
effects of of emfs on sperm there's no
evidence that it is disrupting sperm at
least to my knowledge I honestly I have
to say just going to say I don't know
but I do know that um heat is related to
fertility and sperm count right and um
you can look at the birth rates as a
function of the month of conception and
you can see that for example in war
months in war climates uh there's less
yeah so there he he does play a role but
how much that's tied to cell phone use I
I think that's something that's now
under investigation by a lot of groups
and um we'll see what they find yeah the
data on sitting more than a few hours a
day on um having legs that are very
large as a consequence of obesity or
even just legs that are large uh heating
the the scrotom and th those data are
fairly um I would say solid in terms of
the relationship to reducing sperm count
um heat is not good for sperm which is
why the scrotum has its um the features
that it does to move the the testicles
further or um closer to the body um
getting back to egg um egg count and
quality there's some evidence that um
girls are entering puberty earlier um
but that uh women are also undergoing
perimenopause menopause earlier earlier
um do we do we know what that is the
consequence of there are several new
papers actually on the menopausal age
showing relation to a number of
chemicals but I can't quote them to you
right now I don't remember which class
it was that they looked at but um I
think that's right I think there is
growing evidence that earlier you know
fewer it's also called premature ovarian
failure um so that women are just not
producing the eggs as long as they used
to yeah but um
[Music]
um the I just want to say something
about the fertility can we go back to
fertility please um
so when this comes up and there I'm sure
you've seen the literature there's a lot
of literature on this that say fertility
is going down you know fewer children
are being born a people say well that's
a good thing because it's less of a load
on the planet which is an another
discussion and then they say well this
is due to choice that people are
choosing to have fewer children and
they're choosing to um delay
childbearing till they're no longer as
fertile uh they're using more
contraception women are more educated
they're entering the workforce all of
these social factors are given as the
reason for decline in fertility and um I
just need to point out whenever I hear
this that it's not just human fertility
that's
declining um the number of species that
are becoming extinct is increasing
rapidly and there is there have been
for at least 40 years evidence that
those pesticides that affect us are
affecting animals as well and um so the
decline in fertility in non-human
species cannot be attributed to delayed
childbearing or use of contraception
right right and it's interesting because
um we hear we usually hear first about
species that are about to go extinct
that are badly endangered I don't know
what the proper language is but is about
to go distinct um like the Florida
panther right or you know we we hear
that you know there the species of like
there's a very small subset of them left
uh the blackf footed ferrets in Montana
I think one feret his name is um
Scarface SED something like 300 lit that
then led to the EV they started out
outbreeding because if you do too much
inbreeding obviously it's not good and
but then they were able to at least
partially recover maybe fully recover
the those populations and people forget
the the domino effect of these
ecosystems when one species is
compromised like when the black-footed
ferrets I know it might sound kind of
silly but um were compromised in terms
of their populations the prairie dog
population went up the grasses were
getting eaten far more and then there's
all these Downstream consequences you on
bugs and you know and I'm not an expert
in this but one doesn't have to be an
expert to understand like you you move
one pin here and and the whole web moves
and um and so or you move one node and
the and the whole web uh reconfigures
and um and that's what Nature has been
doing for millions of years right but um
at some point it is conceivable no pun
intended that we are going to be the
species on the endangered species list
right I mean that's that's not like a an
outrageous sci-fi movie like right like
at some point humans might be added to
the endangered species with the
exception that we have we're very clever
and so we found a lot of ways to do
medically assisted you know conception
right ixie the the the literally you
Gentle grabbing of one sperm and forcing
it to con to uh to um fertilize the egg
um is something we've covered on this
podcast in our fertility episode with
Natalie Crawford in a Solo episode that
I did um there are questions that people
have reasonable questions about whether
or not the um The Offspring of those
types of scenarios are the same as the
right the the genetic um probability
experiment as you mentioned before of
having you know 200 million sperm and
then letting Nature Select the one that
is most um robust in that environment
yeah and and you know the number of
Technologies is increasing we're very
clever species
and and um for example I don't know if
you've heard of gam
Genesis so it is now possible to create
um an embryo from a a sperm cell from a
skin cell skin cell can produce um uh a
sperm cell and an egg cell and you give
it the right transcription factors and
you can you can um so this is kind of
interesting exciting and scary right
this is like the the um what is it I
think the vulture vultures the females
uh there's some way in which two female
vultures or maybe a single female
vulture can um create Offspring in the
absence of a male there's also a
three-party IVF I don't know if you're
aware of this where this was um
developed where there's a mitochondrial
disease you can take the uh two eggs one
from the intended mother you take the
nucleus so you get the DNA you put it
into an egg of somebody that um where
the DNA has been removed but where the
spindles which are rich with
mitochondria are from a typically a much
younger host and then he use a sperm so
it's actually three parents it's the
spindle of one mom the DNA of another
mom and a sperm they do this in the UK
for mitochondrial disease it's still
illegal in the United States as far as I
understand and it's done in other
countries um and in theory legal issues
must be yeah but and but in theory this
would allow women of any age provided
they can they still have eggs
um to have their DNA propagated forward
because they could the DNA can be put
into a younger egg that is um has the
spindle quality that allows for um you
know the production of more cells I mean
this is this Canon has been done in
humans yeah yeah so we're I mean you and
I won't think of all the things that
will be developed you know in the next
10 20 years to CH you know to meet the
challenge of declining fertility by
ordinary conception I mean I think
that's that's how we're going to solve
this problem for us we're going to just
be smarter and smarter about how to do a
medically assisted um conception and and
and then the question is going to be and
it'll take time to know this is whether
there are effects in The Offspring
adverse effects in The
Offspring um it's it's a little tricky
because for example if you use the sperm
of an infertile couple and you see let's
say say the sun is is subfertile that's
born that way um but you do it you know
in a test tube or whatever and then you
can say well maybe um that's because the
father was infertile and he's got
inheritance from his father from that
you know you know what I'm saying so you
can't know whether the if you see an
adverse effect in in an offspring you
have to be very careful that it's not
something that they've gotten because of
problems that led the couple to seek
assisted reproduction you see you follow
me yep y yeah um super challenging
fascinating problem so in anticipation
of this sitdown together uh I put a
question out on X formerly known as
Twitter um I let people know that I was
hosting an expert in endocrine
disruptors in phalates and pesticides
rep productive uh implications Etc and I
asked for questions and they came up
with a huge number of excellent
questions many of which you've already
answered things like um is tap water
safe what can we do to our tap water you
mentioned you distill water my
understanding is that reverse osmosis
provided there's re mineral
remineralization excuse me difficult
word to say can also be effective Etc um
there were a lot of questions about um
cosmetics and laundry Det
detergents um I don't know if we
discussed laundry detergents what do you
use in terms of laundry detergent um or
that is presumably one can find I don't
even remember okay don't go by my
product okay for one thing I'm not going
to be pregnant anytime soon no um the uh
I I believe there are some solutions um
related to the uh like instead of bleach
people can use um hydrogen peroxide
can't speak about specific products
actually um you know I can tell you who
can you might like to talk to her so you
remember I mentioned million marker the
company that did the inventory not the
comp well they are a company but um so
they look at million marker I think
you'd be interested okay yeah and and
and the person who runs at Genoa is a
Chinese
American um who uh and a friend of mine
and we're going to be writing a grant
together um and she participated in the
film so our participants send their so
what if you go to million
marker you log on and if you agree to
pay whatever it is $199 I think you send
your urine in they give you a kit you
send your urine in and they test it for
all these things in your urine so you
know what's in your body you might want
to think about it might be interesting
and and then if you pay another 100 I
think you get these this counseling and
so blah BL you can see the different
levels of but she knows all about
products I don't know about product
because it's a moving Target I don't and
also I don't like to talk about product
names because it sounds like I'm
endorsing them so um right and we won't
um expect you to give product names and
um I'll follow your recommendation that
you just gave um somebody asked about
food dyes just generally the dieses in
Foods I saw an incredible study recently
that Science magazine covered so Science
magazine very reputable of course yellow
number five I forget what the precise
name is but the thing that makes Cheetos
really bright they put it on the bellies
of adult mice and it literally makes
them
translucent oh yeah I saw you can see
the organs saw that it's wild it's so
scary I sent it to Rogan and he uh I
won't he was like whoa his his version
of wo um I was like I also said wo he
probably said holy right um no
he no no I'm not going to say what it
said but it was he didn't curse there
were a number of questions about
household items again not looking for
specific products but for instance soaps
body wash cleaning sprays floor cleaners
laundry related
cleaners do any or all of these contain
endocrine disruptors unless one is
careful to to find the ones that don't
okay um receipts how serious is it
should we be concerned about the bpas
and other end endocrine disruptors on
receipts yes so and my suggestion is
just ask for an electronic receipt MH
and then you don't have to deal with it
yeah but they're definitely absorbed you
know into your body any impact of um
endocrine disruptors of the sort we've
talked about today on the thyroid system
yes presumably in the in the bad
Direction not yeah I mean this is an
interesting point let me just say
another word about it so
um the there was a ongoing study in the
Pharaoh Islands off Denmark and
they studied posos chemicals and showed
that um people who fished there there
were Fisher people and they they ate the
fish and they were getting high levels
of posos in their body and had um this
is published um effects on their um
immune response so my concern and I
don't know if anyone's looked at this is
given everyone's vaccination like our
our is our response to vaccination now
altered by these chemicals I don't know
but I think it's a really interesting
question but there there is a whole
field of the effect of these chemicals
on the thyroid system and there's a lot
of evidence that it's adverse can these
endocrine disruptors be detoxed from the
body is there anything that we can do
what's the quickest ways um things like
sweating um are there ways to improve
liver clearance of these endocrine
disruptors that the answer to that
depends on the class of chemicals so the
chemicals that are water
soluble in particular the photes and the
bisphenols leave the body in a matter of
hours you don't have to do anything you
just have to stop taking them
in right the forever chemicals the um
posos
chemicals pesticides
are and though but so it has to do with
how they're handled by the body are they
put into the you know if they're water
soluble you pee them out if they're fat
Sol soluble
they're going to be around for a long
time so it just depends on the chemical
structure of the chemic of the the
compound there was a question about
non-stick pans you covered that earlier
if someone had to pick between non-stick
coated pans versus seasoned iron pans no
question iron there's no risk associated
with SE seasoned iron panss a number of
other questions such as why does Europe
have such more stringent laws Etc um
lots of questions about atrazine
questions about ointments and fragrances
you've covered and I I must say that um
as I scroll through these hundreds of
questions if not more um you've done an
amazing job at um clarifying for us
what's known what is not known and
essentially where it's a probably should
avoid definitely avoid and look we just
we just don't know right um and well you
know there I have to distinguish between
we don't just don't know and I just
don't know it's not I mean there are
many things that I don't
know sure it's a huge field so you know
maybe with some you know ask the
question of chat
gpg yeah we we'll be certain to um ask
chat GPT and we will be certain to ask
um uh other experts in in these areas
but um I just want to make very
clear I and everyone listening and
watching truly appreciate the work that
you've been doing in this area for a
number of years we're so grateful that
you took that Airline flight with your
this chemist um that you mentioned um
that you stored the urine of those
pregnant women that you analyzed it and
that you've gone down this path of of
exploring you know things that are
really disruptive to our health and
potentially to the existence of our
species as um you know as we talked
about earlier
there is the possibility that we go
extinct um not because of a meteor but
because we fail to replace ourselves um
and that we fail to replace ourselves
because we destroy our biological
ability to replace ourselves I think
it's hard for people to um internalize
that very real possibility because we
feel ourselves sitting in traffic with
thousands of other people and go there's
too many people right this kind of thing
but um I want to thank you for the work
that you've been doing and continue to
do for your willingness to write books
and to educate the public on podcasts
like this and others because um these
are topics that are pretty emotionally
loaded for people I don't think anything
gets people quite as inflamed as the
idea that what they've been been
ingesting and exposed to um especially
in terms of consumables that they've
spent their hard-earned money on have
been um harming them harming them and
their offspring and generations to
follow that there's something that
really lands deep in in that way but you
you've also offered us a lot of um
possibility and a sense of agency over
these these things and I love um that
you weave your math and statistics and
probability uh Theory background into
all of this because what comes through
is um intense curiosity intense rigor
and a real desire to do good so thank
you so much for joining us and please
come back again as you make more
discoveries it's been really fun thank
you for joining me for today's
discussion with Dr shaa Swan to learn
more about her work and to find a link
to her excellent books on these topics
please see the links in the show note
captions also I should mention that if
you're interested in learning more about
microplastics and endocrine disruptors I
did a solo episode of The huberman Lab
podcast on that topic and that is also
linked in the show note captions if
you're learning from and or enjoying
this podcast please subscribe to our
YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc
cost way to support us in addition
please follow the podcast on both
Spotify and apple by clicking follow on
Spotify and apple and on both Spotify
and apple you can leave us up to a fstar
review please also check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast also if
you have any questions for me or
comments about the podcast or guest or
topics that you'd like me to consider
for the hubman Lab podcast please put
those in the comment section on YouTube
I do read all the comments for those of
you that haven't heard I have a new book
coming out it's my very first book it's
entitled protocols an operating manual
for the human body this is a book that
I've been working on for more than 5
years and that's based on more than 30
years of research and experience and it
covers protocols for everything from
sleep to exercise to Stress Control
protocols related to focus and
motivation and of course I provide the
scientific substantiation for the
protocols that are included the book is
now available by pre-sale at protocols
book.com there you can find links to
various vendors you can pick the one
that you like best again the book is
called protocol an operating manual for
the human body if you're not already
following me on social media I am
huberman lab on all social media
platforms so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter threads Facebook and
Linkedin and on all those social media
platforms I discuss science and science
related tools some of which overlap with
the content of the hubman Lab podcast
but much of which is distinct from the
content covered on the hubman Lab
podcast again that's huberman lab on all
social media platforms and if you
haven't already subscribed to our neural
network newsletter our neural network
newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly
newsletter that includes podcast
summaries as well as protocols in the
form of brief 1 to three page PDFs these
protocols cover things like deliberate
cold exposure deliberate heat exposure
how to optimize your dopamine how to
improve your sleep all available at zero
cost to access these newsletters simply
go to huberman lab.com go to the top
right corner menu scroll down to
newsletter and enter your email and I
should mention that we do not share your
email with anybody thank you once again
for joining me for to today's discussion
with Dr Shauna Swan and last but
certainly not least thank you for your
interest in science
[Music]