welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Char
rangano Dr Char rangano is a professor
of Psychology and Neuroscience at the
University of California Davis he is one
of the world's leading researchers in
the topic of human memory and memory of
course is an essential component to our
entire lives memory isn't just important
for remembering things that we learn
it's also vitally important for setting
the context of our entire life meaning
only by understanding where we come from
who we were and who we are currently can
we frame what we want to do in the next
moments the next day the next years and
indeed for the rest of our life this is
why for instance that people who have
deficits in memory either due to brain
damage or due to age related cognitive
decline or diseases like Al aler
dementia suffer so much not just in
terms of not being able to remember
things for sake of daily tasks but also
for sake of placing themselves in the
larger context of their life recognizing
family members isn't just about being
able to relate to those family members
on a day-to-day basis it's also about
understanding the full context of all
one's memories with those people and
what meaning a given interaction brings
to any of life's experiences so today
you're going to learn how memory Works
you're going to learn about things like
deja vu you're going to learn ways to
offset age related cognitive decline
what the research really says about that
and ways to prevent things like
Alzheimer's dementia we also talk about
ADHD or attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder and Dr rangan shares his own
experience with ADHD how it relates to
memory and the tools that he has used in
order to combat his own ADHD Dr rangano
has an Exquisite ability to describe
research studies in clear terms and to
combine that with his own narrative and
life experience in a way that really
frames for you practical tools that you
can apply in your daily life before you
begin I'd like to emphasize that this
podcast is separate from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford it is however
part of my desire and effort to bring
zero cost to Consumer information about
science and science related tools to the
general public in keeping with that
theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of
today's podcast our first sponsor is
David David makes a protein bar unlike
any other it has 28 grams of protein
only 150 calories and 0 gam of sugar
that's right 28 gram of protein and 75%
of its calories come from protein this
is 50% higher than the next closest
protein bar These Bars from David also
taste incredible my favorite bar is the
cake flavored one but then again I also
like the chocolate flavored one and I
like the berry flavored one basically I
like all the flavors they're all
incredibly delicious now for me
personally I try to get most of my
calories from Whole Foods however when
I'm in a rush or I'm away from home or
I'm just looking for a quick afternoon
snack I often find that I'm looking for
a highquality protein source and with
David I'm able to get 28 gram of
highquality protein with the calories of
a snack which makes it very easy to hit
my protein goals of one gram of protein
per pound of body weight and it allows
me to do so without taking on an excess
of calories again I focus on getting
most of my food from whole food sources
throughout the day but I typically eat a
David bar in the late afternoon when I
get hungry between lunch and dinner
sometimes also midm morning if I get
hungry then and sometimes I'll use it as
a meal replacement although not a
complete meal replacement it can get me
to the next meal so if I need to eat in
a couple of hours but I'm really hungry
I'll Le to David bar as I mentioned
before they are incredibly delicious in
fact they're surprisingly delicious even
the consistency is great it's more like
a cookie consistency kind of a chewy
cookie consistency which is unlike other
bars which I tend to kind of saturate on
I was never a big fan of bars until I
discovered David bars if you give them a
try you'll know what I mean so if you'd
like to try David you can go to
david.com huberman again the link is
davidpro
docomo today's episode is also brought
To Us by levels levels is a program that
lets you see how different foods affect
your health by giving you real-time
feedback on your diet using a continuous
glucose monitor now one of the most
important factors in both your short and
long-term health and your energy levels
each day is your body's ability to
manage blood glucose to maintain energy
and focus throughout the day you want to
keep your blood glucose level steady
without big spikes or crashes now I
first started using levels about 3 years
ago as a way to understand how different
foods impacted my blood glucose levels
and it's proven incredibly informative
for determining what food choices I make
when best to time my food intake around
things like workouts both cardiovascular
training versus resistance training and
when and what to eat close to sleep or
not so close to sleep when I wake up in
the morning if I'm fasting or breaking a
fast Etc indeed using levels has helped
me shape my entire schedule so I have
more energy more cognitive Focus my
workouts are better my sleep is better
everything got better when I understood
how different things especially food
were impacting my blood glucose levels
so if you're interested in learning more
about levels and trying a CGM yourself
you can go to levels. l/h huberman right
now levels is also offering an
additional two free months of membership
again that's levels. link l nk/ huberman
to try their new sensor and two free
months of membership today's episode is
also brought To Us by waking up waking
up is a meditation app that offers
hundreds of guided medit meditation
programs mindfulness trainings yoga
needra sessions and more I started
practicing meditation when I was about
15 years old and it made a profound
impact on my life and by now there are
thousands of quality peer reviewed
studies that emphasize how useful
mindfulness meditation can be for
improving our Focus managing stress and
anxiety improving our mood and much more
in recent years I started using the
waking up app for my meditations because
I find it to be a terrific resource for
allowing me to really be consistent with
my meditation practice
many people start a meditation practice
and experience some benefits but many
people also have challenges keeping up
with that practice what I and so many
other people love about the waking up
app is that it has a lot of different
meditations to choose from and those
meditations are of different durations
so it makes it very easy to keep up with
your meditation practice both from the
perspective of novelty you never get
tired of those meditations there's
always something new to explore and to
learn about yourself and about the
effectiveness of meditation and you can
always fit meditation into your schedule
even if you only have two or 3 minutes
per day in which to meditate if you'd
like to try the waking up app please go
to waking up.com huberman where you can
access a free 30-day trial again that's
waking up.com huberman to access a free
30-day trial and now for my discussion
with Dr charin ranganath Dr Charon
ranganath welcome thank you speaking of
memory we go way back we do we do I was
a graduate student when you were first
hired as
an assistant professor which for those
that aren't familiar with the academic
nomenclature and trajectories assistant
professors are professors that have not
yet received tenure but now of course
you're a full professor and you are a
world expert in memory something that I
think occupies the minds of uh all of us
even if we're not trying um so that's
actually the segue to my first question
which is as we move through our
day how much of our cognition our
perception is focused on things that are
happening in the present as opposed to
being driven by prior memories um you
know studies ever been done that
evaluate how often our brain you know
switches to thoughts about the past of
course we learn about things that are in
our present I know this is a cup because
I was taught that um at some point but
what I'm referring to is how much of our
thinking on a day-to-day basis is
literally in the past well it's
interesting that I mean it's first of
all it's a great question to start off
with and it's interesting because I
actually don't think memory is about the
past I think memory is about the present
and the future it's about taking
selectively what you need from the past
to make sense of the present and to
project to the future I know you're a
vision guy right and so if you look at
people's just eye movements right the
first time I came into this room I'm
sure I wasn't aware of it but I'm sure
my eyes were going all over the place
now if I came back to visit you say if
you're like oh that was an awesome
interview or whatever right um hopefully
but maybe not but let's say I do right
chances are yeah so I go and my eyes
will probably go right to the Rick Rubin
photo then I'll go right to you know
something else to the espresso machine
and so my memory allows me to make
predictions about where things are and
it's almost preconscious so that it's
happening without our awareness and it's
like confirmatory we're grabbing the
important stuff and making sure
everything is where it's supposed to be
and you can see this play out in
phenomena also like change blindness
it's a little bit of a different
phenomena but basically in change
blindness there's a famous example where
they show a video of people playing
basketball and they're passing the ball
back and forth and then this guy in a
gorilla costume just walks behind them
and about I think it's 40% of the people
who watch this video don't see the
gorilla
and the reason is is that you're
generating these serious expectations
about what's in front of you and so
you're not literally seeing what's in
front of you you are creating an
internal model a simulation really of
what the outside world is and memory
whether it's semantic memory which we'll
talk about I'm sure uh your knowledge
about the world like the cup thing if
it's episodic memory which is your
memory of what happened let's say just a
minute ago it's all coming into play and
terms of your sense of where you are
right if I just ask you what day is it
you will use episodic memory for that
tomorrow morning I'm going to wake up in
a hotel room if I don't have episodic
memory I will freak out because I'll be
like where am I did I get kidnapped why
am I here and that's really the
experience of people with memory
disorders I mean they have to be in
really familiar environments because
it's frightening otherwise right
so even I wouldn't necessarily say that
we were never seeing the present of
course we are right but our
understanding of the present is so
informed by the past that it allows us
both to focus on what's important what's
non-redundant with what we already know
and it also allows us to detect
surprises and find out the things that
are unexpected and grab the most
informative stuff as well yesterday I
took a brief nap in the afternoon I do
this practice of non-sleep deep rest oh
yeah um in the afternoon I got have you
teach this to me sometime um yeah it's
very restorative for mental and physical
energy I find um but I fell asleep uh
toward the end of it and when I woke up
I was in a dark room um but I didn't
know where I was for about felt like 10
15 seconds somewhat scary but I I'd
forgotten that I was in my solo Studio I
turn turned the room lights down um
what is it when we have these lapses in
memory as we emerge from sleep or
sometimes um if one has been severely
jetlagged um you can experience this
disorientation of of place do we know
what that is well a lot of your sense of
where you are comes from episodic memory
now there's a school of thought that
says that episodic memory which is your
ability to remember past events is comes
from your ability to understand where
you are and we we have some interesting
data from sea liines actually that's
speaks to this issue sea lions sea lions
yeah okay we'll get back to that we'll
get back to the sea lions but um I would
argue that to remember like where you
are when you first get up you have to
engage in an active episodic memory
retrieval that is you have to figure out
well how did I get here and that takes a
moment orienting yourself takes a moment
and that because it's it's a little bit
of a controlled memory search right it's
not something that's in front of you
that reminds you of where you are
initially and you're also in this little
bit of a fog when you wake up um I don't
know enough about sleep to say but I
would suspect that people probably are
in some kind of a stage oneish or just
high alpha um these brain waves that are
like very much associated with kind of
grogginess as you're getting up
neuromodulators are probably super low
so you know so basically not much
epinephrine not much adrenaline yeah
yeah exactly and so that's going to lead
you to really be slow ining that memory
retrieval that you need to orient
yourself so like in the clinic if you
want to ask if you want to understand
whether someone has a memory disorder
one of the simplest things is to ask him
what day of the week is it what month is
it um who's the president who's the
president yeah right now that's a loaded
question well depends on what time of
year relative to the election you ask
right um very interesting uh I'm curious
also why it is that most all of us have
a stable representation of who we are so
my understanding is that even people
with very severe memory deficits don't
wake up in the morning and wonder you
know who am I or who is this person in
this body that somehow um we remember
that we have a self that we are separate
from other selves that that kind of
knowledge U might be innate we might be
born with it um and that the
representation of Self in memory is very
stable is that true well here's what
I'll say there it's a real really
interesting and complex question
everything's you always talk to a
scientist you get it's complicated but
um I'll give you a simple of a thing as
I can which is so if you look at
patients with amnesia so they have a
memory disorder where they can't form
new memories they have a sense of who
they are as you mentioned right they
it's not like they don't know who they
are and I mean like they know their
names they know their biographies and so
forth but what happens is at the time
let's say if you had gone swimming and
you nearly drowned you had a hypoxia
incident or a cardiac arrest or um you
know you had like a traumatic brain
injury severe memory deficit right your
sense of self doesn't update it gets
kind of stuck and so there is kind of a
sense of looking and not expecting
yourself to be as old as you used to be
uh as you are because like you're you're
stuck in your sense of who you were and
I do think I talk my good friend Rick
Robbins at at Davis is a personality
psychologist and he studies the
development of personality and it does
develop you know it kind of stabilizes
in these adolescent years and that's
actually also interestingly related to
memory but it does change people do
change in really interesting ways so one
thing is that people grow more
optimistic on average as they get
older um and right yeah yeah that's true
so Laura Carstensen your colleague at
Stanford actually has done some really
cool work on that topic they become more
uh optimistic and yet I would argue that
we become more quote unquote set in our
ways because neuroplasticity the ability
to re reshape our neur neural circuits
diminishes with age well you know so I
think that's overdone a little bit I
think you're right you know you
definitely see less dopamine activity
for instance as people get older and um
uh but what I'll say is that people have
gobs if you have a healthy aging person
they gobs of neural plasticity but often
what happens is yeah you get stuck in
your ways and that could be related to a
few things one is that you get changes
in the prefrontal cortex and that leads
you to be less cognitively flexible um
it can be also because people just build
up so much prior knowledge about the
world that it just becomes kind of
ingrained that this is the way it is and
it's harder to be surprised I mean you
kind of see this with old scientists
right they go like nothing's new
everything everything's been disced CED
in 1960 and nothing new has happened
since then and by the way for folks
listening who are considering a career
in science nothing could be further from
the from the truth in fact prior to
recording uh you told me a saying that
I've never heard before I don't know if
it's cynical or optimistic but if I
recall the the quote uh that Dr
ranganath passed along which does not
come from him it descends from somebody
else not to be named is that quote
science progresses one funeral at a time
very very actually uh very interesting
statement could be examined from a
number of directions but I agree I agree
I mean there's some wonderful let's call
them aged scientists with tremendous
knowledge and excitement I mean one only
has to listen to like the noo Prize
winner Richard Axel talk about his love
of w faction and perception and you can
sense his delight and he's getting up
there sorry Richard but it's true you're
in your he's in his 70s right hopefully
he'll live a very long time but um and
certainly science progressed as a
consequence of him being alive and work
working on the old factory system but I
think what you're referring to is really
important neuroplasticity doesn't
necessarily shut down as we age it might
even stay open to the same degree as
early adulthood but if I understand what
you're saying correctly you believe that
it's because people tend to seek out
less new knowledge as opposed to lacking
the ability to create new knowledge I
believe that's true but that's kind of
that's an opinion I don't have data on
that per se but someone's probably
looked at this but that would be my
sensus is that a lot of what happens
with the way people's lives play out as
they get older have to do with their
environment and their experience and
that's not to say that I mean yes
neuroplasticity does change as you get
older but it doesn't account for the
degree to which sometimes people can get
stuck and set in their ways and you know
your example of the scientists is such a
beautiful example because I look at the
scientists who don't get stuck in their
ways right and they constantly challenge
their beliefs they surround themselves
with a diverse group of people who
stimulate them and they're also open to
prediction error that is they're open to
saying something could be violating my
knowledge of the world or my my
understanding of the way World works so
here's just an example and this is I
know I'm going to be free associating
all over the place we get into that but
it's like what are the coolest studies
that we ever did um and I totally credit
my postto matius Gruber for this he came
into my lab uh originally German came in
from University College London and he
told me he wanted to study curiosity and
its effect on memory I'm like this is
just I am being totally closed-minded I
said this is just a dumb topic you know
it's everybody knows if you're curious
about something you'll remember it
better just because you're interested
right so he said no no no this is really
interesting and so he did this
experiment and I got on board with and I
you know we really kind of collectively
it was just this beautiful thing where I
was exposed to something new and I got
excited about it and so the idea was we
would give people these trivia questions
and so it's kind of like a pub quiz
right you sit in a pub quiz sometimes
you get a question and it's like I don't
know the answer sometimes you get it you
I know it sometimes you go I don't know
but God I really need to know the answer
to this and you get this itch right or
sometimes your listeners I mean they're
probably very curious people that's why
they listen to this and maybe some them
go to your show notes afterwards because
they want to learn more right so we
actually scan people's brains using
functional MRI and so we scan them when
they get questions and sometimes they
had said I'm really curious to find out
the answer to these question sometimes
they weren't curious and then we make
them wait about 8 seconds and then or 10
seconds I think it was something like
that and then we show them the answer so
they're kind of in suspense it's kind of
like you're watching like Breaking Bad
or something back in the day people at
commercials and so you're like oh no I
got to find out what's going to happen
to Walt right so you're in suspense you
need to know the answer to this or you
don't care and sometimes you just don't
care you're just sitting around so we
show a little face and we say Hey How
likely is it you think this person knows
the answer to the question now this is a
totally dumb thing to do because they
don't know this person they're just
looking at a face they're just making
some arbitrary decision but I'll get to
why we did that because that was I think
the coolest part of the experiment but
let's first get back to the the trivia
question so we found that when we looked
at brain activity when we give people
the question right afterwards there is a
burst of activity throughout the
so-called reward circuit of the brain
there's this Ser it's not really a
reward circuit as we've discussed
offline it's really these areas of the
brain that process the neurotransmitter
dope mean and unlike many other
neuromodulators this go all over the
place dopamine is much more restricted
in its effects and so in the midbrain
near the ventral tegmental area sorry
I'm geeking out on this no we've talked
about that in this podcast there a
particular I think the key statement
that you made that people should hold on
to as we progress through this is that
dopamine is not dumped everywhere it's
not sprinklered all over the brain it's
released in a fairly restricted sites in
order to drive particular processes I
think that's sufficient for now yeah
yeah and so when we look at functional
MRI we can't measure dopamine but what
we see is activity in the dopaminergic
midbrain area meaning the area of the
brain around the midbrain and you see it
in the nucleus accumbens or What's
called the ventral stratum which is
another area that's super high dopamine
reward processing area the more Curious
people are like on a one to six scale
the more activity you see it's just like
this beautiful relationship right and
it's not driven by the answer now
there's a reason we probably didn't get
it for the answer but it's driven by the
question so it's not like they're like
oh I learned something new it's like I
want to get this knowledge and so that's
part one of the story part two of the
story is we show that face right after
the question and if people are curious
to find the answer to the question they
get a bump in memory for the faces
relative to if they're not curious now
the faces have nothing to do with the
trivia question but it's being in that
curious state that drives this
dopaminergic activity in the mid brain
so there's a whole lot lot of other
studies findings from that study but
basically I think if God I gotta you
know how sometimes you do a lot of
studies me I published like 180 studies
so it's like I'm trying to remember
exact I think it was like functional
connectivity between the hippocampus and
the red brain during the face was
predicting better memory for these faces
in general something like that we can
put a link to the paper of course and
the show Capt so let me make sure I
understand that the um when people are
prompted with a question that drives
release of dopamine the amount of
dopamine is proportional to how curious
they are to get the answer to that
particular question and
then the dopamine itself if elevated
because they are very curious can
increase the probability that they will
remember the answer it creates a millu
an environment for better memory but
that can confuse us and make us think
that dopamine improves our memory but
it's that Curiosity increases dopamine
which increases the capacity to store
information that comes subsequent to
curiosity beautiful synopsis but I'll do
two cheerful amendments so one is um
technically we're not measuring dopamine
so I have to be very clear about that
this is bold signal meaning it's you
know metabolic activity but it's
following all The Usual Suspects of
where you'd expect it to be um the
second thing is I do think that dopamine
is playing a part and I mean it
definitely facilitates plasticity so I
do think it helps in learning the answer
for sure and there's a whole Theory
called synaptic tagging which basically
says that if you just release a bunch of
dopamine and then you have these
potentiated synapses that you can dry
plasticity in those synapses even if
it's not happening at the same time but
what's really cool is the face has
nothing to do with the trivia question
the theory that we have is when you get
that bump in dopamine activity You're
motivated you're energized to get the
answer and you're driven towards the
state of plasticity and now I'm giving
you something has nothing to do with
this question and boom you got it you
know so when people ask me and they ask
me a lot yes how best to elevate their
brain
dopamine one reasonable answer based on
this study is curiosity to engage
curiosity do you know the quote by
Dorothy Parker the cure for boredom is
curiosity there is no cure for curiosity
um I believe is it was Dorothy Parker if
it wasn't I'm sure we'll find out
quickly in the uh uh in the comments on
YouTube older people show the effect
just as much as younger people do kids
show it just as much as older people do
um it's just something that sticks
around so I mean speaking to your point
if you are surrounding yourself with
things that will stimulate your
curiosity and if you're open to that
Curiosity and we could talk about
knowledge gaps and all these things that
stimulate curiosity novelty is another
one um Richard Morris has some beautiful
data on this with rats but um emerel and
I too have some data with humans
surprise all of these things I have a
whole chapter in my book on this uh
drive that system so the dopamine system
the dopamine system so basically if you
expose yourself to opportunities to be
proven wrong you expose yourself to new
people places situations and you allow
yourself to be energized by these things
and not be scared and anxious not be
like oh this person's saying something
that I disagree with I can't deal with
this you know or oh we figured this out
30 years ago we don't need nothing's new
here if you can be open to that I would
argue that you're going to be engaging
lots of plasticity and that's something
that's preserved in old age recently we
had uh one of the world's experts on
romantic
relationships uh on this podcast um
Esther Perell to be specific and we
talked about a lot of things related to
romantic relationships but she said that
one of the most um sustaining factors
for romantic relationships over long
periods of time is a sense of curiosity
both about the other person but also
about oneself and how one changes in the
context of the relationship and also
curiosity about where the relationship
could eventually go where one to
continue to invest in it so this word of
curiosity seems to be a resounding theme
um I'm struck by although it makes total
sense that curiosity would drive
dopamine release in these uh Pathways
that novelty would drive dopamine
release in these Pathways and that also
in the Physical Realm dopamine is so
important for physical movement yes I
don't think this is a a coincidence
right some somehow Evolution organize
this neuromodulator dopamine to be
involved the way I think about it is in
both a physical movement mhm it's
required for it in fact as well as
cognitive movement what we're really
talking about is is cognitive forward
movement if there is such a thing is
there is there a a we're both
neuroscientists but you're the memory
researcher is there is there sort of a a
word or a framework for thinking about
cognitive movement forward meaning um as
opposed to just recycling past ideas and
memories the notion of taking memories
and actually putting them as you said
earlier into the present to anticipate
the future actually forward mental
movement huh that's a really interesting
question well first of all I want to be
careful and not to say dopamine does
this because it's kind you're it's a
trap right it's like well to be clear
you observed heightened activity in a in
a dopaminergic circuit so the idea that
it would not involve dopamine is is a
bit of a stretch but you didn't directly
show that it was
do I want to be exact and just say that
assigning a single function to a
chemical is you know risky but that said
I do believe there's a link one of the
things that you see is in Parkinson's
disease dopaminergic neurotransmitter
mission is shot and depression is also a
symptom of Parkinson's disease it's it's
quite a severe one in fact and uh so
what I think one Theory goes is that
dopamine energizes us to seek Rewards or
to seek information right so a big part
of movement is you move to get something
it's a approach right there they talk
about approach and avoidance as basic
kind of things that you want to program
and so a person with Parkinson's disease
have has a problem with willful movement
Tremors and stuff too um but I think
that dopamine is involved in this kind
of energizing you to move I think it's
involved in energizing you to seek
information I think it's involved in
energizing you to seek rewards and uh so
I do think there's some kind kind of a
common pathway there and speaks to this
issue of the difference which you've
talked about and I talk about a lot as
wanting versus liking and so Kent barage
at Michigan is a great work on those Rec
gobs and gobs of manipulations of
dopamine activity and what he finds is
an animal let's say that is deprived of
dopamine it will go for rewards just
fine it just won't work for them it
won't do the work that you need to get a
reward but if you just put it in front
of them they'll take it
so what dopamine it is heavily involved
with these opioid systems that does
Drive um uh reward responses and it's
heavily involved in learning about
rewards and that's why you get a big
dopaminergic bump when an animal gets a
reward because you're learning about the
reward and what predicted the reward
there's a little bit of a credit
assignment process that takes place
what's interesting is you get this too
with actually my colleague at at uh
Davis Brian wilin some beautiful work
where he's looked at Trace conditioning
which is when you have like a let's say
if you play a tone and you wait a long
time and then the animal gets a shock
right and so what you uh what you find
is is that the animal learns to be
afraid of the tone but it's such a long
time in his thing I think it's on the
order of 10 seconds or above the animal
has to be somehow doing something to be
able to blame that tone for getting
shocked right and so what he found was
that there 's this burst of dopamine
activity in the locus ruus which
actually known for norp andrine but
there's really cool work on dope meaning
the LC now modulating hippocampus sorry
to get all nerdy here but no no this
trust me this audience likes nerdy I
think that's why part of why they're
listening Locus Fus is just a area of
the uh of the brain that um tends to
sprinkler large Brain areas with
epinephrine which is or norepinephrine
nor adrenaline for alertness so somewhat
distinct from the dopamine system but
you're telling us it can also releasee
dopamine yes that's right and sometimes
they co-release from the same neurons
from what I understand and so what seems
to be happening is and he's studying
this now but what seems to be happening
is it's not that the animal's going oh I
just heard a tone I heard a tone and
then they get shocked it may be more
like they get a shock and then they get
an immediate what just happened and then
they get a memory retrieval of the tone
and that allows them to put the two
together to learn that this tone caused
the shock right and dopamine seems to be
playing a part in that learning process
too so it's not just about reward it's
really kind of you know the next time
you hear that tone you might if it were
a real threat you could actually escape
from it right and there's this whole
active avoidance literature that you can
look at with these approach circuits
that are actually quite useful for
avoiding threats and avoiding punishment
so it's really to me I see this role for
energizing and that's of rewards I mean
you know I like rewards as much as the
next guy right I mean look at how much
coffee I drank when I got here um so
it's not that but it's just that it's
mobilizing you I think I'd like to take
a quick break and acknowledge our
sponsor ag1 by now many of you have
heard me say that if I could take Just
One supplement that supplement would be
ag1 the reason for that is ag1 is the
highest quality and most complete of the
foundational nutritional supplements
available what that means is that it
contains not just vitamins and minerals
but also probiotics prebiotics and
adaptogens to cover any gaps you may
have in your diet and provide support
for a demanding life for me even if I
eat mostly Whole Foods and minimally
processed foods which I do for most of
my food intake it's very difficult for
me to get enough fruits and vegetables
vitamins and minerals micronutrients and
adaptogens from food alone for that
reason I've been taking ag1 daily since
2012 and often twice a day once in the
morning or midm morning and again in the
afternoon or evening when I do that it
clearly bolsters my energy my immune
system and my gut microbiome these are
all critical to brain function mood
physical performance and much more if
you'd like to try ag1 you can go to
drink a1.com huberman to claim their
special offer right now they're giving
away five free travel packs plus a year
supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's
drink a1.com huberman to claim that
special offer one thing that we talked
about just briefly earlier was this
non-sleep deep rest protocol um that is
in uh um yoga tradition is called Yoga
Nidra or yoga sleep because you lie down
it's self-directed relaxation long
exhale breathing to slow your heart rate
etc etc I called it not nsdr not to
appropriate it but because the language
of Yoga Nidra is a little bit of a
separator for people it sounds a little
bit esoteric right and non-sleep deep
rest tells you what it is right um
there's a study at the University of
Copenhagen I can provide a link to it in
the show note captions and I'd love your
thoughts on it that show that people who
do this practice this is a pet um
Imaging study so positron and tomography
for those that don't know and they
see significant increases in strial
dopamine in the condition of people that
do this self-directed relaxation as
opposed to a more traditional meditation
and this is why I say that nsdr is
useful for restoring mental and physical
Vigor which translates to this idea that
dopamine prepares us for or as a
reservoir for potential movement
typically toward rewards and I love that
we're talking about some of the other
facets of dopamine because all too often
people think about it as pleasure or
motivation and certainly it's involved
in motivation um and uh I'm very happy
um to learn that uh it's also involved
in learning I think that's that's a
that's a that's a novel perspective on
dopamine and we hear so much about
dopamine do you think that when dopamine
is released as a consequence of
curiosity in a way that primes the
memory
system that um we become uh entrenched
in particular particular behaviors or um
routes of uh pursuing curiosity um to
the exclusion of others what I'm
thinking about here is a kid um we've
seen these data um kids with ADHD um
actually have terrific ability to focus
if it's something that they're really
excited about really curious about so
you give a kid with ADH who loves video
games a video game and they're like a
laser so it's not that they lack the
capacity to focus it's that they have a
harder time dropping into Focus but it
seems that because of the learning ass
um
Dimension to dopamine that these
circuits could potentially quote unquote
learn that it's video games that
provides that feeling of focus to the
exclusion of other things meaning how
does one keep a
diversification of of um inputs to the
dopamine system so that we're
continually driving dopamine through
lots of different things as opposed to
just social media or just video games or
just pick your favorite yeah yeah thing
um because a becoming a functional human
being involves the requirement to focus
on many things not just the things we
were curious about yeah yeah yeah um I
mean to me I talk about this a little
bit in the book but um to me and and if
you look at the literature too you can
see this a big part of being curious is
the appraisal process so to speak and
what I mean by that is
saying something happens right let's say
something in your environment happens if
you're going to you have a decision to
make is this interesting is this
important is this scary and
I think the thing is is that you need to
be open to that possibility that it's
interesting so like so let me just give
you like an example that I um that I
often give let's say you're walking in a
neighborhood you're traveling like you
do for many of your uh events and you
walk into a new neighborhood you haven't
been to it's nighttime kind of poorly
lit and you hear a loud noise right you
could be like well that's a gunshot I
better hide or I better run or you could
be like oh maybe there's a club nearby
and there is like a cool band playing I
should go check this out that appraisal
is really critical for how you respond
and uh so it's not just a matter of
curiosity happens it's a process of
cultivation and it's a process of
appraisal and so I mean this is I think
you know I'm not a wellness Guru or
anything but it's like I think this is
one of the cool things about mindfulness
training is it forces you to take the
mundane and be curious about it
and when you start paying attention to
your breathing uh my friend Mishi Jaws
really kind of turned me on to this uh
she wrote a book on on mindfulness and
meditation and one of the things that
happens is you're breathing you realize
wait a minute this one isn't the same as
the last one right or you can do these
medit I'm sure you've done this right
this uh part of like this sound is
different I'll sit in the backyard doing
thanks to you I do this morning
10-minute thing and so I'll be out in
the backyard and I'll be like hearing
some sound and I'll be like oh that
sound there's a bird there I didn't even
notice that you know and then there's
some other sound I'm hearing the freeway
that's annoying but I heard it and so
these it's really a matter of paying
attention in some ways and being open to
it and I think this speaks back to this
thing about as you get older sometimes
people find it scary to be in a new
place people find it scary to meet a
person who's different from them or so
forth I mean I love listening to music
that's a little bit out of my comfort
zone some people hate it you know so I I
think some of it is sort of cultivating
being comfortable with
discomfort think it's such an important
theme um I feel like nowadays in part
because of the algorithms on social
media we're we are fed things that um
feed our U progressively greater and
greater scrolling and um dwell time as
it's called you know to they algorithms
are measuring clearly how long we dwell
on a given image and what's in that
image and Etc um but it would be nice to
um cultivate uh an algorithm for
curiosity surely it can be done I mean
you got all these smart computer
scientists and AI folks um uh and we
come into this world naturally
curious um all primates including humans
um will visually fixate on anything
that's novel right and study it mhm I'm
try and make predictions and gain
understanding um maybe now would be a
good time for us to discuss a little bit
about the the circuitry involved in
memory so that we have that as a
template to to digest some other themes
in memory um most people are probably
familiar with the so-called
hippocampus um which is uh mean seahorse
it looks a little bit like a seahorse
although the anatomist had a little bit
of an imagination there in my opinion
but um hippocampus um let's add to it
prefrontal cortex which you've already
mentioned and um and then these
neuromodulatory systems so if we were
going to assign a one sentence
definition functional definition to each
of those areas um what would you say the
hippocampus
does all a whole lot of other
neocortical areas let's add those in but
I think if we can start with three I
think then folks can digest the
hippocampus is controversial I mean it's
the most studied area of the brain
arguably except for maybe V1 um visual
cortex yeah and uh but I believe and my
colleagues do I wrote a big paper with
Howard I delate Howard ion bomb and
andinus on this who um you know from
Davis and uh we believe that it's about
linking various experiences to a context
and what I mean by that is you've got
information about smell high level
Vision high level semantic knowledge
information right and the hippocampus is
wiring is really set up to not
understand what's going on so the late
David maru's Pioneer in computational
Neuroscience proposed that what the
hippocampus is about is what he called
Simple memory it's basically saying I
know Andy huberman sorry is okay us to
call me Andy that's fine yeah long story
it's a Davis thing you would understand
so um uh so I know Andy huberman right
but to have a memory of this moment
that's separate from let's say I saw you
at some Neuroscience Retreat when we
were in uh when you were in grad school
I have to have some part of the brain
that doesn't know who you are to some
extent right because I got to keep them
separate and so there are the
hippocampus what it'll do is it'll form
a memory that's not an Andy huberman
memory it's an Andy in this place at
this time in this context and that's
what allows it to support what's called
episodic memory which is your ability to
say I went to Washington DC once and I
remember going to the
Smithsonian as opposed to your knowledge
about what generally happens in
Washington DC oh the president's there
oh that's where a lot of politics happen
oh the Smithsonian is a place in DC it's
a memory of your being there at a
particular place and time now there's
other parts of the brain that allow you
to associate that information in a
meaningful way and to be able to to
actually expand on that context and
create these narratives and these
stories about it and where the
prefrontal cortex comes in and it's it's
a huge area it's about onethird of the
primate brain so it's just massive uh
there are a lot of people who go well
there's no real there's a bunch of
different areas and all do different
things and I subscribe to the view that
that is very true and at the same time
there's a global function of the
prefrontal cortex which is what's called
cognitive control it's this ability to
say I'm going to regulate my movements
and I'm going to regulate my perceptions
and my thoughts based on what's
important to me in terms of this higher
order goal right so um when I tested for
instance patients with prefrontal
lesions I'm sure Mark desposito talked
to you about this it's like the Hallmark
of them you know they used to say well
the prefrontal cortex it's important for
working memory and you could record from
neurons in the prefrontal cortex or look
at E from orai signal um and if a person
or a animal is holding something in
their mind like a phone number neurons
or bold signal and MRI will be highly
elevated their activity will be elevated
um throughout this period of time where
they're holding in mind but it turns out
if you just ask somebody with a major
prefrontal asan here's a bunch of
numbers five 2 7 8 you know I ask you to
tell them back to me in right order they
can do it just fine but now I start to
distract them I move my hands around
there's a plane going on you know flying
outside the window I had that literally
happen once now they start to bomb it
because their attention is not
controlled by their goal it's controlled
by the environment around them and so
this is where things get really
interesting so I once tested a patient
and I'd heard about this but until you
see it it like doesn't register really
blew my mind so there's a a test called
the Wisconsin card sorting test and we
don't have to get into all the details
of it but basically it's this test where
people learn some rule about where to
put a card on a table right and they
don't get told the rule they just learn
it and patients learn this with
prefrontal damage learn it just fine
right is it that they get a a error
signal or a correct signal if they're
doing it in the right direction over
time they just kind of the brain figures
it out yeah yeah so maybe I'll give a
little bit more background but I don't
want to go in the weed no that's okay I
I if I'm correct if I'm wrong I forget
the Wisconsin card task details but you
know like they they're told to just
start swinging the cards and that the
the um the AL the correct algorithm will
reveal itself by a series of error and
um correct signals and so maybe I'm
taking all the red cards and putting in
one pile black cards and putting in
another getting error signals so that
maybe I go odds evens maybe I divide by
suit if it depending on what kind of
cards they are maybe I organized by even
odd alteration and sooner or later the
brain figures it out yeah exactly
exactly and you don't need a prefrontal
cortex to do that which is surprising
but you don't you can do it and so
there's context
dependent action and learning without
the prefrontal cortex yes but let's
let's unpack this context thing right so
now you've been let's say putting all
the diamonds in one pile you've been
putting all the Spades in another pile
right so now I Chang the rule but I
don't tell you and you put the D
Diamonds the Queen of Diamonds In The
Diamond pile let's say and now I say
nope that's wrong so now you have to
wait a minute that was right all this
time what's going on this is like life
this is like life right the thing that
used to be used to work for you no
longer works so you keep doing this and
a person with an intact brain will
eventually figure out okay that's not
working I'll try another strategy and
then they'll learn the new rule right
it's not easy it's a pain but people
will do it this
in particular kept on using the old Rule
and so you have to give a series of
hints going like H what's your strategy
here and they're like they'll tell you
I'm putting it according to the color
and then you okay well does that appear
to be working for you and they'll go no
they'll just keep doing it they
perseverate they perseverate but the
interesting thing is he knows it's not
working but he's can't help himself from
doing it
and so what the prefrontal cortex is
it's not about this declarative
knowledge about what you should do and I
think this is very deep because I think
often we get moralistic about people's
actions especially for people who have
head injuries or something like that and
it's like you can have all of these
beliefs that you want to have but you
need the prefrontal cortex to translate
these high order beliefs things that are
very abstract into actual concrete
action otherwise what you do is not
going to be dictated by that knowledge
so how this relates to memory is we're
constantly barraged by information I
think it's it might have said something
like 35 terabytes I don't know but it's
a big number and the estimates get
bigger and bigger every year so we're
barged by information there's no way you
can even pay attention to it all right
so you really rely on the prefrontal
cortex to be able to say this is what
I'm doing right now and everything else
it's noise here's the signal that I need
to focus on and that's super important
for memory because one of the things you
see in old age is older people are bad
at most memory tests but it turns out in
the in Labs we kind of overestimate that
and the reason we overestimate it is
we're giving them a test which is
something hard it requires a lot of
focus and it's not something they do
every day but Karen Campbell and Lynn
hasher these great cognitive
psychologists did this cool experiment
where they had a bunch of other stuff
that people were supposed to ignore in
this memory task where they're studying
a bunch of things they're trying to
memorize a bunch of stuff but there's
stuff going on they're supposed to
ignore the older people were just as
good as the younger people at
remembering the stuff they were supposed
to ignore they were just bad at the
stuff that they were supposed to pay
attention to that's so interesting maybe
you could say that another time you said
it very clearly I got it but say it one
more time because if anyone missed it
this is super important older people can
they were bad at remembering the stuff
that they were supposed to remember but
they were just as good as the older as
the younger people maybe even better but
definitely as good as the younger people
at remembering the things that they
weren't supposed to pay attention to
gosh it it speaks to um almost two um
parallel processing streams for memory
if I'm not mistaken um or maybe so
what's going on there is it that um one
form of memory involves the suppression
of information and that circuit is
actually uh quite active in these older
people and young people whereas
curiosity for um and the ability to
remember and integrate new information
is somehow diminished in older people
earlier we um we were talking about how
that's not the case that curios if
curiosity is intact memory is intact and
growing yeah well okay I should say the
benefit of curiosity on memory is intact
in older people I I got that wrong I
don't know Matias could tell me if I
just email him in a break or something
but but uh I don't know if curiosity
itself is as high in older adults
selfreported or I would guess no but
this is why I asked about movement
earlier it's also curiosity is also
linked to your ability to access novel
scenarios of course online you can just
thumb scroll or click and access all
sorts of novelty um is there any there
must be data as to whether or not people
in their 70s 80s and 90s are um
scrolling social media uh to the same
extent that um younger people are I
don't know but I can say two things to
this one is is that definitely there's a
lot of work on media multitasking and
the short answer is bad for memory
period okay so scroll scrolling is bad
for memory well media multitasking is
bad for memory scrolling we the tech
thing is a super fascinating area in
general it's really how we interact with
the tech that's bad
but if you're an older adult your
frontal function is not going to be as
good you will be more distractable you
will be more likely to go off course and
so that scrolling is going to be more
potent because as you pointed out the
algorithms are all designed to suck up
our attention so psychologist herb Simon
came up with this beautiful term called
the attention economy right and so the
idea is that the more information that
you have in front of you the more
impoverished you are in terms of your
attention so there's no such thing as
free speech because it's like you have a
limited supply of attention so
everything has a cost and so the more
information you have in front of you the
harder it is to pay attention to what's
important and that's where I think the
older adults really lose some of their
their functioning because basically I I
talk about in the book and it's not a
Perfect Analogy is neurons are
functioning kind of like a democracy in
the sense that you know real democracies
involve these political coalitions or
alliances right I mean people talk about
the right and the left but that's dumb
because it's like there really just
alliances between people who like
different things and they just form
these convenient alliances with each
other right but let's just imagine
neurons kind of do this in the brain
right and so you have in theory to be
able to pay attention to something some
Coalition of neurons has to be firing a
lot that is corresponding to the thing
that you're trying to pay attention to
but if something is Salient bright shiny
loud it's just grabbing your attention
what's going to happen is is that those
neurons start to shout down the neurons
that are trying to keep you on what's
not shiny but it's important right and
so what happens is with the prefrontal
cortex you can bias that competition now
that's the term that people have used in
literature that allows you so what
people have found for is just a really
cool finding again is you can find in
the visual cortex neurons that fire when
you're see seeing something red and Ne
on set fire when you see something blue
let's say right kind of distorting the
picture but you get the idea so if an
animal is trying to hold in mind
something I say hold on a mental picture
of something that's blue what happens is
the blue neurons are firing in visual
cortex even though the animal is not
seeing blue right it's just they're
thinking about blue you damage the
prefrontal
cortex nothing so you lose that
selectivity so what's happening is the
prefrontal cortex
is biasing the competition and saying I
know Blue's not shining in front of you
there's no shiny blue thing in front of
you right now but I need these neurons
to stay active and so it's doing this
modulation to help out the neurons that
are keeping the information that's go
relevant so what happens when that
communication goes let's say due to
hypertension diabetes you get all this
white matter damage that happens with
old age and this is really a big thing
that is very preventable with the right
protocols so to speak I'll just bre
white matter are the fiber tracks the
wires that uh essentially that connect
neurons across uh long and short
distances exactly yeah and so if you
damage those long range tracks the
prefrontal cortex is not efficiently
able to bias that competition and so now
the inan gets Remembered at the expense
of the important that's that's I think
the key thing and uh a lot of that's why
why people talk about the prefrontal
cortex as the central executive as
anybody who's worked a job knows it's
like the executives are useless right he
trying to get an executive to do I mean
except for some who are useful but then
they don't really run companies very
well there's some CEOs that are doing
spectacular things but um yeah well okay
we will go
there um controversial shall we say but
anyway so uh like a good executive their
job isn't to micromanage their job is to
say here's the picture here's my vision
for the company and I want everyone to
be working towards this goal not you
know sifting through the mail room not
paying the bills right and so what
happens is is that when you have certain
kinds of things that happen with aging
like damage to the white matter that
happens uh through essentially tiny
cerebrovascular events most likely and
we've done some research on this um in
our lab uh in collaboration with Bill
jagus who's now Berkeley and Charlie
dearly and
you can measure this in MRIs with a A
measure called white matter
hyperintensity you use a scan that shows
up little bright spots where the white
matter is probably damaged and what you
find is is that these people with white
matter
hyperintensities actually have memory
performance that's as poor as people who
have hippocampal atrophy probably in the
earliest stages of
Alzheimer's and they're also bad at
controlling information even when they
don't have to remember something thing
so it's like a double whammy and it's
kind of like the executive is trapped in
a in you know a remote place and they
got no internet access and no phone and
so they can't communicate with the
company as every just doing their own
thing right and that's that's a little
bit about what what can happen with
aging it doesn't have to but that can
happen and you see this to a really
great extent in many disorders this is
why so many disorders really affect
control and frontal function multiple
sclerosis
um diabetes um uh many kinds of things
we talked about brain fog many kinds of
inflammatory conditions will affect it
um uh depression clinical depressions
I've seen people older adults with
depression who are cognitively more
impaired than people in the MCI stage of
Alzheimer's really yes so depression is
dangerous for memory it's terrible for
memory and it seems to be a risk factor
for Alzheimer's as well do you think
that depression is dangerous for memory
and a risk factor for Alzheimer's
because it is by definition anti-
curiosity I would probably not say that
and I I would say also I don't know what
what I mean you know once you kind of
get into these things in the
epidemiological world everything
interacts with each other right and
there's genetics and there's environment
and blah blah depression means poor
sleep which means poor learning which
means I think that's a big part of it
you know I think that's a big part but
you do okay so let's go back to your
question because I do think curiosity is
affected by depression I don't know the
research on this but I would be shocked
if it isn't and I do think that dopamine
activity is disrupted in depression and
your motivation to get anhedonia is the
hall one of the Hallmark symptoms of
depression as is rumination by the way
which is memory retrieval of
preferential negative retrieval of
negative events and cogitating over them
I'd like to take a quick break and thank
one of our sponsors
function I recently became a function
member after searching for the most
comprehensive approach to lab testing
while I've long been a fan of blood
testing I really wanted to find a more
in-depth program for analyzing blood
urine and saliva to get a full picture
of my heart health my hormone status my
immune system regulation my metabolic
function my vitamin and mineral status
and other critical areas of my overall
health and vitality function not only
provides testing of over 100 biomarkers
key to physical and mental health but it
also anal anes these results and
provides insights from Top Doctors on
your results for example in one of my
first tests with function I learned that
I had two high levels of mercury in my
blood this was totally surprising to me
I had no idea prior to taking the test
function not only helped me detect this
but offered medical doctor informed
insights on how to best reduce those
mercury levels which included limiting
my tuna consumption because I'd been
eating a lot of tuna while also making
an effort to eat more leafy greens and
supplementing with Knack and cetal
cysteine both of which can support
glutathione production and
detoxification and worked to reduce my
mercury levels comprehensive lab testing
like this is so important for health and
while I've been doing it for years I've
always found it to be overly complicated
and expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the tests done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function health.com huberman function
currently has a weight list of over
250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to hubman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to function
you probably think a fair amount about
age related cognitive decline and
Alzheimer's and I'm just curious um at a
personal level uh what are the sorts of
things that you do to try and offset
cognitive decline uh you seem to be a
very vivacious and curious person um
I've known you a long time and I don't
know whether or not you were caffeinated
every time we met but you have a lot of
energy you're a very curious person um
you just wrote a book um we'll talk more
about and you're going on podcast you're
doing a lot of things besides running a
you know worldclass research laboratory
so clearly a lot of curiosity um what do
the data say about ways to maintain or
enhance one's memory
capacity with the understanding that
curiosity is probably involved as we
talked about earlier but at a at a
really basic level um I mean a number of
things leap to mind but I'm just curious
what you're um if you had to pick like
three to five things that are clearly
substantiated in the data as supporting
the maintenance or enhancement of memory
as we get older what are those I mean as
a memory researcher I almost find it
myself like ashamed when I talk about
these things because as you know so many
of the most important factors are ones
that are related to just health so for
instance uh you mentioned sleep that's a
big one um we can actually there's a
beautiful study that speaks to this that
was done 29,000 subjects in China and
they followed them up for 10 years now
at the beginning of so they divided
people into three groups they said okay
here's well what they said is there's
six lifestyle factors that we're going
to investigate one was I think uh um
engagement in cognitive activities I
think one was social engagement one was
uh um physical exercise uh not smoking I
think no alcohol but they identify these
lifestyle factors that were basically
just kind of good lifestyle factors
right so they get people who have four
to six of these lifestyle factors going
versus uh zero to one of these lifestyle
factors we'll just take the
extremes when they start they're all the
same 10 years later the people with four
to six lifestyle factors going for for
them are performing almost twice as high
on memory tests as the people with zero
to one Lifest wow so these are people
exercising paying attention to their
sleep um social engagement what are some
of the other I believe I'm guessing low
inflammatory diet yeah yeah definitely
not smoking and uh and smoking and
alcohol um I think were big ones the
smoking one is interesting because we
know smoking can cause cancer and
cardiovascular risk is is real there
although there are some data as I
understand that nicotine itself not
smoking vaping dipping or snuffing but
that nicotine can be proc cognition and
maybe even Pro memory um and nowadays
people are using nicotine more and more
I'm not a big proponent of this because
of the blood pressure increase and the
typical routes of administration are
dangerous but um nicotine I've been told
is protective for Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's is that true well um Let Me
by the way I just have to say forgot
healthy diet healthy diet was a big one
too which I Define as people wonder what
is that and there are all these online
debates about vegan vegetarian carnivore
blah blah blah but I think most people
in the world are omnivores most and I
think it's very clear that the number
one thing for healthy diet is to try and
get most of one's food from nonprocessed
or minimally processed sources that sort
of sets you in the right direction yeah
yeah so I was actually emailing uh with
Dean and Aisha sherai who really talk a
lot about this yeah they do great work
they do great work and so they were
actually sending me some stuff and I had
known about some of this but like
Mediterranean diet has worked really
well oil fruits vegetables fish eggs
limited amounts of meat although I
happen I'm half Argentine so I I'm yeah
you like your steaks I do yeah which I
think you know is let me come back to
this point because I think is super
important but leafy greens were a big
one they pointed out a rush Presbyterian
study that I didn't know about that put
people on I think it was called the DASH
diet and it included leafy greens as a
big part of it and that had a dramatic
increase in cogn I mean dramatically
preserved cognitive performance in
people who were on that diet so the
healthy diet is a big part now
nicotine's interesting so if you notice
a lot of people with schizophrenia smoke
and uh one of the things that's been
found is is that nicotine does seem to
improve functioning in people cognitive
functioning in people with schizophrenia
now
I think the big thing to remember about
any kind of drug and this goes for food
effects probably too but especially
drugs is there's huge individual
differences huge and so I mean just to
give you an example I could not function
without that coffee that I had this
morning and then coming in here but my
daughter would not be functional after
those cups of coffee some people really
are affected by these different things
differently and then of course there's
always a dose response curve and they
often follow these inverted use so Marc
desposito um who was my postdoc Mentor
did a lot of work with dopaminergic
drugs and a lot of people had done these
drug studies early on on cognition and
they would find no effects or sometimes
would make people worse and what he
found was was that if you looked more
carefully there was an inverted U effect
where some people and it depended on
their working memory capacity were
actually benefiting from the drug and
then these other people who were let's
say I can't remember as higher or lower
were doing worse and there's a genetic
component to that unsurprisingly
dopamine Transporters play a role and so
forth and so now you start to get into
all of these Gene environment drug
interactions that are just I would
really caution people against saying
nicotine is good nicotine is bad I think
it really really is a much more complex
issue just like marijuana right so you
can look at uh smoking weed in
adolescence for people who are at high
genetic risk for psychosis it
dramatically increases your risk for
psychosis that's my understanding too
although the times I've said that on the
internet I caught a lot of uh push back
from some of the Cannabis researchers
but then having invited one of them on
this podcast um I then got subsequent
input from other researchers which
counter their narrative which uh we can
both say because we're both research
scientists um that's what you call a
field you know so maybe cut out any
misinformation I might have said in the
Ed no no no you didn't I you didn't I
think the point is just that um it's
very clear that there are certain
individuals for whom high THC
consumption can trigger psychotic
episodes yeah and we're seeing this but
not everyone yeah I mean I I mean we're
we're now interestingly seeing this with
psychedelics where it's like all these
positive effects of psychedelics were
being are being brought up but you know
a lot of people remember the negative
effects on people like Rocky Ericson
from the 13th floor elevators or like uh
Sid Barrett from Pink Floyd who became
psychotic after doing large amounts of
LSD what was the first example uh Rocky
Ericson from the 13th floor elevators
great psychedelic band oh psychedelic
okay we'll talk more
about Char is a is a himself a rock and
roll musician and loves rock and roll
hence the reference to Rick Rubin
earlier um and there's a photo of Rick
here in the studio that uh our
photographer Mike bayback took um so we
were looking at that together so yes
psychedelics have claimed the minds of
certain people made them uh helped
contribute to their pre-existing
presumably psychosis I should also say
um In fairness to the other compounds
out there methamphetamines have also
significantly contributed to um the
progression of psychosis in many people
so it's not just psychedelics right and
and then of course there are those who
um have somehow managed to take
psychedelics and um become more sane
yeah at least remain at least as sane as
they were before yeah and of course
sanity is in the eye of the beholder too
but uh what I'll say is is that yeah and
you can see this actually there's some
new concern about Aderall and stimulants
and uh if you're giving it to people who
might be at high risk for schizophrenia
it might also promote psychosis that
makes sense given the neag ergic
dopaminergic um involvement in
schizophrenia and those drugs are pro
noradrenergic dopaminergic in general
yeah yeah exactly exactly so it's really
a much more complicated interaction and
I think this is where this whole realm
of personalized medicine will be super
helpful
um but there does seem to be a broad
General effect for certain dietary
intera interventions berries seem to be
good leafy greens seem to be good eat
healthy we talked about the exercise and
my understanding I've been looking at
this in detail lately but I'd love your
thoughts is that while
everybody we now believe men women Etc
should both uh should do both
cardiovascular exercise so to speak
Elevate heart rate for 12 to 60 Minutes
kind of thing depending on the intensity
as well as resistance training to
maintain neuromuscular function offset
sarcopenia Etc to me the really
impressive effects of exercise on
learning capacity and the Brain in terms
of brain health seem to come from
cardiovascular exercise and that could
just be because that's what's been
emphasized in the studies but even when
one looks at some and compares the best
human studies um it really does seem
like getting blood flow up to the brain
yeah get getting a a nice um release of
modulators into the brain facilitates
learning and then of course people have
to do something with that learning right
so um do you make an effort to exercise
for the specific purpose of maintaining
or enhancing brain function yes yeah
actually so I like when I finished my
book I limped to the Finish Line I had
all sorts of crazy stuff happen I won't
depress the readers with all the crazy
stuff sure people would be curious what
what does it take to finish a book and
how much you mean you took a toll on
your body it took probably I mean matter
I probably lost some like biological
years in that but it was really like I
mean it was great I mean it was really
an emotional roller coaster though but
then I had a bunch of you know I'm
trying to do
science write this book basically in my
spare time which doesn't really exist as
you know how it goes sure and then I had
life happen you know my mom was in the
hospital my cat died on my birthday I
mean it was just like yeah see I didn't
want to depress people with all this
stuff it's real real life I'm just sorry
to hear it yeah no no no it's okay so
then I finished my book and uh I was
like just thoroughly thrashed and I had
a sabatical because I wanted to have
time to promote the book and educate
people about what's in the book and uh
which I'd never gotten a chance to do
before it's like doing this fantastic
right I get to talk to people so um I
really wanted to make some changes and
actually this gets something we were
talking about before we started
recording which is after I wrote the
book it's all you know it's going in the
proofing stage uh I was talking my
daughter and just you know out of the
blue she said we're talking about ADHD
and she's like Dad you totally have ADHD
and I'm like what you know and I'm like
oh gen Z you know overdiagnosis of ADHD
whatever right and then I remembered
when I was a kid my school contacted my
parents and said you have ADHD he has
ADHD and it was interesting because it
was like I actually was ahead in school
by a year and I got held back because I
just was so socially bad I couldn't stop
talking in class and I was just like
really awkward and impulsive and uh um
and so but the you know it was the 70s
nobody did
anything you know and and I had all
sorts of behavior issues and so forth
and there are other factors going on too
but it really got me thinking oh my God
I got to make some changes I'm living
this unsustainable life where I'm
jumping from crisis to crisis to crisis
and say I don't have time for blah blah
blah and
so um my again it's going to sound
depressing but it's got a happier ending
so my dog had died in 2019 of cancer and
that was my first dog and so I thought
I'm never getting a dog again and uh in
2020 in the pandemic I got another dog
because yeah and what kind of dog uh
she's a both of these were shelter dogs
so they're all mixes um I'm sure there's
some pitol in her because that's every
shelter dog either has pitol or um or
Chihuahua exactly so but she's looks
very Belgian malano and she moves like a
Belgian malan beautiful dogs yeah and
they're so smart and super athletic I
mean she can like jump vertically you
know just like it's so like which all
come home she'll like jump up and then
push herself off me which is like a very
classic thing and so that's why they can
jump like she can climb up like s feet
up a tree to chase a squirrel yeah they
use these for military operations in
tier one military yeah yeah yeah jump
out of planes with parachutes yeah yeah
and she's but she's a smaller dog so our
big our older dog looked like kind of
she wasn't she was actually a kelpy mix
I think but she looked like a um a
Rottweiler and so everyone was scared of
her even though she's the sweetest dog
this one she's like smaller even though
she looks kind of Shepherd likee
everyone's like oh your dog is so sweet
she's so cute you know you're like but
this one's the ninja exactly yeah yeah
um I mean all shelter dogs have a little
bit of a crazy switch and them don't
it's like it's it's tough for them
they're they're like feral people feral
dogs yeah but they have big hearts yeah
they're eternally grateful you give them
a home yeah yeah exactly and you know
one of the things that I was thinking is
I missed walking the dog I missed that
activity and so I make sure to do that
every morning and this is goes back to
some of the activity things that we're
talking about I know I'm totally
drifting away from which is ironic no I
see I see I see where you're going with
this yeah so but this is this is is a
little bit different but it's related
which is um having a sense of purpose is
very important for healthy brain aging
there's a trends of cognitive science
article can send you it's one of these
things that neuroscientists don't talk
about because it's not we don't
understand it but it's hugely important
it's part of this whole phenomenon what
they call cognitive reserve and you know
having this dog that I'm taking care of
especially cuz you know my kid had gone
to college just growing up living
independently walking this dog every day
it gives I mean obviously I'm married
and I love my family and I've got lots I
got love my students and so forth but it
gave me more and I'm exercising in a way
that's kind of fun I'm listening to
podcasts and I'm moving and so that's
something right there it's not just the
exercise but it's the whole thing right
I'm not doing something that I hate so
then I'm like I hate running I hate I
have this inertia because i' my ADHD
brain doesn't like to do stuff unless
it's shiny fun right I could go into
work I could write this book cuz it's
fun for me you know but so I'm like how
can I do this and so I I ended up
shelling out for a personal trainer I
blow my advance on a personal trainer
who's great and I go to see her and I
she tells me what to do so I don't have
to think about it and it's fun and
you're in great shape you're a few years
older than I am and I haven't seen you
in a while and I I always have this like
slight fear when I run into a colleague
again after a while cuz there was this
joke that we didn't tell professors
until we became professors about the the
so-called tenur look you see someone
come in as a postto you see them as a
junior professor and then you see them
after tenure and tenure is a big
milestone right it corresponds to
academic freedom Etc it's a it's a
wonderful Milestone it's a wonderful
thing that we both have this um but you
see some people who got tenure you just
go oh goodness they look like they're
you know aged 25 years in five years
yeah we also see this with former
presidents not all of them but a lot of
them and um and so to run into you I
well I saw you on Le freedman's podcast
but then to see you I'm like Char's
taking great care of himself it makes me
happy it's not a judgment it's it's it
makes me happy because I I love my
colleagues and I want to see them live a
very long time because I don't subscribe
to the idea that science progresses uh
one funeral time of my favorite
scientists okay let's let's not attach
that saying to me it was a joke I'm
saying I'm saying that there's certain
scientist my fellow scientists if you're
out there anywhere don't H me there are
certain scientists that you'd love to
see live forever and you're one of them
so um so you said walking the dog which
presumably gets you some sunlight um a
lot of sunlight in Davis even in the
winter cloud cover is bright up there it
gets your own regular sleep Rhythm so
but you said this um sense of purpose
right so and I'm curious about how you
now frame exercise you said you don't
like working out you made an investment
in your health by paying a trainer so
now you you train regularly and that's
also an investment in your brain health
MH and and um if we were to go back to
this notion of sense of purpose are you
talking about a larger sense of purpose
like okay I I want to contribute to
understanding of how the brain works
you're a brain Explorer after all and
therefore the exercise and the money you
put towards the trainer is linked to the
ability to do that are you linking these
nodes or is this are these kind of
separate entities like I want to be
healthier and here's a way to be
healthier and at Ergo um I'll be around
longer to study the brain to me and
again you know I'm not a social
psychologist so this a little bit off
out of my wheelhouse but to me the sense
of purpose is is kind of this
existential thing of like you know I got
to take care of this dog and I gota you
know and I when I look at this dog and
she's moping around in the corner I feel
bad but I feel like it's my
responsibility to do something with my
students yeah with my students I have uh
you know I had was very very fortunate
to have many people leave my lab after
the pandemic which destroyed so many
careers and many people left my lab and
I got faculty positions I'm like so
happy for them speaks to your mentoring
as well well thank you I mean got you
know you do well because you have good
people in lab as you know true and so uh
but what was interesting was IID
finished the book and my lab was
relatively empty and I did feel
purposeless I felt that absence of that
sense of this bigger thing and so part
of the work is you know and this was
like a thing that I felt doing the book
promotion is I feel a sense of purpose
in explaining science to people I got an
email this morning as I was getting on
the plane from somebody who was asking
me a question about memory and I was
just like this is so cool you know after
you spend years lecturing students and
some of them are sleeping in class and
you wonder is anybody really impacted by
this and it's just been a beautiful
thing so that gives me a sense of
purpose I've come up with I've really
rededicated myself to research and we're
doing these huge computational models of
learning and I'm trying to get we're
doing VR stuff and we're going to be
doing all sorts of new things in the
research and that gives me a sense of
purpose but a lot of it to me about the
connection thing that you bring up it's
super important because often I find
myself again because of the ADHD thing I
for all of these things that I like
there's things that you have to do that
suck and for me that suckiness is
utterly painful I mean and I know
there's a lot of people like I know ADHD
is over diagnosed right now for reasons
that are interesting um and I know a lot
of people it's very kind of fashionable
to say stuff something like that maybe I
don't know people are can be judgy about
the stuff but for me it really is
painful I mean I I've actually found
that it's hard for me to work with
certain people if they talk slowly I
it's that tough so I've really had to
think about uh so I actually hooked up
with an ADHD coach who has been
phenomenal for me and I know coaches are
another controversial thing I don't know
like I'm not in my world you want learn
something you learn something from
somebody who's sked in how to improve
somebody at something yeah yeah well you
know I mean I I didn't know what to
expect because it's like a an
unregulated world so to speak or
minimally regulated but the person I
found was just amazing and the first
thing she had me do was she put down had
me write down a sheet of all my values
and order them and rank them and stuff
I'm thinking this is such a waste of
sorry Lori but I was thinking initially
this is such a waste of time why am I
doing this I don't really value any I
don't know I just do things I don't
necessarily value them or whatever but
then I started writing them down and and
then later I was talking to her about
like this you know some of my troubles
with motivation and getting things done
that I don't want to do and I'm kind of
Infamous for having trouble getting
things done that I don't want to do in
terms of like administrative tasks and
so forth you're a real scientist well
that's true I guess ADHD any scientist
that likes administrative stuff I think
uh I'm willing to call as uh you know
what are they doing in science cuz
that's like you're supposed to be
focusing on experiments so Bravo so so
values then motivation Yeah so basically
it's like so I'm then I put the two
together and I said I'm not giving
myself credit for why I'm doing this so
This goes back to the whole I mean in a
way it goes back to the prefrontal
cortex conversation is what's my goal if
I'm going to see someone and have a
meeting and I don't feel like going to
the meeting cuz I'm tired and I'm bored
or I want to just look at this YouTube
video or I want to go on social media
whatever dumb thing that I would waste
my time on right I say to myself why am
I doing this and I remind myself of that
motivation and it kicks everything in
gear because now I have that goal in
place because the goal just doesn't pop
up for me automatically and so relating
what I do to values is a game Cher for
me but it's a conscious thing that I
have to work on to remind myself of
those values and connect them and that's
part of what I think people lose when
they retire for instance I see this in
people people I'm close to who have
retired they feel like work is their
only purpose and so afterwards they feel
purposeless and then they're just doing
things like you know Doom scrolling or
you know being radicalized on on the
Internet or like you know going into
like but it's just like whatever
captures their attention and I think so
a big part of that sense of purpose for
me has really been to get in touch with
what do I really want and I mean this
goes back to another thing with memory
and I know this a total ADHD free
association thing but it's like um I can
people often ask me okay fine giv me all
the stuff for brain aging and we didn't
even get into hearing aids and uh Vision
testing and oral hygiene and so forth
we'll talk about those three things but
um what I tell people is
I can tell you lots of strategies for
remembering names for remembering where
you've been for trying to um remember
like to do something in the future some
of the hardest memory challenges we have
but unless you do them do those
strategies I can't help you and the
problem is is that and this speaks to I
I really liked what you said we do have
to talk about some exceptions like
retrieval induced forgetting and some
interesting things like the pre-testing
effect but your thing on study skills I
listened to that podcast and I was like
the beautiful thing that you did with
that one of them was that you said
assume that you will forget because if
you go back to the earliest research on
memory by eing house he tested himself
and he actually he created these weird
words called trigrams that weren't
really words he tried to memorize them
and what he found was within 20 minutes
he had forgotten about half of what he
memorized within and I don't mean just
forgotten like he couldn't bring it to
mind
it took him as long to rememorize them
as it was if he had never done it right
so sometimes we have partial memory
where we can't recall it but we get some
savings and it's easier for us to learn
he didn't even have that for a lot of
the stuff so then he waited 24 hours and
he had lost 2third of what he had
memorized right so translate this into
the real world there are some things
that are caveats that we do better in
the real world I would say at the big
things the gist of what we encounter but
the details we lose most of them most of
the details of your life will be gone
and this is true for even I would argue
this is even true for people with highly
Superior autobiographical memory we
don't know for sure but I can tell you
more about that um this is true for
everyone who's been studied as far as I
know and so if that's the case the
question is not like why am I so
forgetful it's why do we remember in the
first place why that titled it for the
book and the question is what do you
want to remember what are the memories
that you want to take with you whether
it's memorizing things for a class like
in study skills or whether it's your
kid's birthday party which I talk about
in chapter one um these are it's about
intention is what I say it's the
difference between attention which can
be grabbed by anything versus intention
which is saying this is what I want to
take with me right let's let's um uh
hover on that attention versus intention
we hear these words all the time um
attention is the directing of one's
perception to particular Sensations or
things in one environment is the way
Loosely defined um accurate but not
exhaustive um intention is understanding
why or having a a cognitive sense maybe
a cognitive emotional sense of why I am
directing my perception to particular
things is that right yes it is directing
your attention based on some reason
that's an internal goal right and that's
where the prefrontal cortex really comes
inh so it's very easy in some ways to
pay attention to me if I'm like
gesticulating and I'm talking very
loudly because it's grabbing your
attention constantly I mean it's face it
I know lots of people in my life who
hate this because I'm so loud and
justicul you're not loud who are these
people giving you this feedback send me
their names and numbers I I I have words
for them and and listen I would say
given you run a world class lab labatory
you're successful in your family life
you're you're successfully raising your
second dog you've written a a
spectacular book you're going on um
podcast you're educating the public I
would say you're doing great so keep
going um and whoever these people are
we'll have words with that um you know
um I need I need like huberman's like
words of encouragement on my phone that
I could just open up plus I don't want
to take us off track but you know I I
spend a lot of time each morning I first
do a non-sleep deep rest or some sort of
meditation Rick Ruben taught me this to
get into intention and there are other
people who have come into my life
recently
um this notion of intention the reason I
said let's hover on it is so important
yeah because we are in a world where
things will grab our attention
especially on social media yeah it's
it's basically a war for attention I
don't think it's an attention economy
anymore or Simon's brilliant you know
I'm not trying to take anything away
from that but it's it's a war for
attention and one of the ways that you
rob your competitors is by taking their
attention I used to Joo and I was in a
very competitive area as a postto I was
competing against a big Lab at Harvard
and this and that we trying to find
genetic markers for retinal neurons Etc
and I said if I could just get them
excited about the wire remember that
show The Wire because it'll suck like 15
hours of those post box time so I
thought you know be really diabolical I
didn't do it but you know telling people
like you have to see the wire they you
know this and that you know because you
get someone on a really good Netflix
program and and if they're a competitor
you just got a competitive Advantage
this being done all day
attention is our ability to for our
perception to be um drawn to whatever is
most uh moving most loudest most Salient
um intention is different yeah and this
is by the way this isn't a technical
term this is just I like it because it
Rhymes and a friend of mine came up with
it so um but yes intention is your
ability to say this is what's important
to me right now and that's why I need to
pay attention to it hence the values
list hence the values list because if if
I don't keep that in mind my so we tend
to think of control as being just like
willpower or like you want to do the
right thing or whatever it's not it's
really a big there's so many parts of it
really but a big part of it is
motivation and motivation is not a
trivial thing it's not simply wanting to
do the right thing but being able to
keep that value in mind and retrieve
that value because everything has a
value associated with right and
sometimes things that are you you know
I'm thirsty and there's water in front
of me that has a big value and that
should grab my attention so it's not
that having your attention shift you
want it to be flexible but you want to
keep these higher order goals in mind
and so it's this balance between
stability and flexibility now the key is
or let's get to your specific example of
like technology right so ever since I
got a phone uh that is a smartphone my
first iPhone when was mine was 2010 mine
was well you did better than me I think
maybe it was around the same it was
iPhone 3 I think was my first okay we'll
have to look up I think I had the iPhone
3 which was whenever that came out yeah
so until then I would check email when I
was at a computer when I'm not I don't
think about it now it's always there and
I get you know and you get alerts on
your phone right so let's let's play
this out now we're having this great
conversation let's say we leave we talk
about skateboarding and punk rock and
like yes why didn't we talk about this
on the podcast right we're having a
great conversation right but now let's
say I didn't put my phone on Focus mode
and I start getting all these little
beeps on my phone I know people I know
played with in a band with somebody who
had ADHD and he would const anytime we
were in a conversation he would just
check his text messages you text in
front of me right so what happens is
every time you do that your you're
essentially shifting your task your
mindset changes your your intention is
somewhat Changed by this new task right
so now I've shifted and there's a cost
associated with that in fact actually
people who study this there's like four
or five different costs that go on it
makes you slower to do the new thing
right now I go back to the conversation
well now I have another cost associated
with that and so I'm not there where you
are in this moment I'm several seconds
behind you and I'm still catching up
while you're talking and that requires
even more control to get caught up and
get back up to speed so I'm straining my
matal resources I'm straining my
cognitive control by shifting back and
forth but here's an even worse part of
it so a memory we haven't even talked
about this but it's like a lot of our
forgetting happens because we have these
blurry memories they're not distinctive
they don't you don't get a population of
neurons that shouts out loud hey that's
this conversation I had with Andy right
it's like it's just kind of this blurry
sense of I talk to someone on a podcast
and not saying that this will happen now
because it won't but um so I have this
blurry memory well why does that happen
well part of it is you have to catch the
distinctive moments of these events and
you have to associate them together into
this cohesive narrative one of the
things we found in our research and
other people have found this is when
let's say if you're watching a movie and
somebody changes the topic of
conversation or a character comes in
something that shifts your attentional
focus and shifts your understanding
what's going on you see this big peak in
activation in the
hippocampus and what that seems to be
related to is encoding a memory for what
happened up to that point and so we call
that an event boundary and so once you
have an event boundary it turns out you
like you go on to the next event and you
have trouble remembering the stuff that
happened right before the event boundary
it's why people end up in the kitchen
and they're like what was my reason for
coming here and it's because they pass
through three different rooms and their
sense of where they were was changing
their mental context updated to the
point where now they have to work to
figure it out right so this is what's
happening when we are shifting between
different tasks I'm texting and I'm
emailing and then I'm talking to you or
as you've probably seen in going to
conferences people scientists scientists
who know better are sitting typing
emails while someone is giving I've done
this because I'm intentionally impaired
or I'm impaired actually ADHD is a
cognitive control issue I think but
nonetheless it's like I do this right so
it's like I get it but it's like you are
now creating this fragments of memories
where it's not I have a cohesive
conversation I have a little bit I got a
little bit more I got a little bit more
and those fragments of memory don't play
together well in memory they can compete
with each other
and that competition is a big part of
forgetting and so that's why it's super
important to just do one thing and then
do another if you want to do social
media fine do it then do whatever it is
you are supposed to do for work right
but it's the shifting that really kills
you because it creates saps your
cognitive control it actually uh creates
these fragmented memories it also
actually increases stress levels so
there's all sorts of you know things I
know there's a lot of tech Bros who are
just like oh no I'm multitask I'm great
at you're not well I I you know I'm from
the Bay Area and spend a lot of time
with those uh folks uh men and women in
Tech I think that the best ones like the
truly exceptional ones are very good at
dropping into a trench of attention
they're very disciplined with their
phone use and the ones that are doing a
lot of task switching often aren't don't
have complete lives they really don't
they're they're not taking care of their
health also and they are sort of under
the sense that like they're working the
time when they're not as a graduate
student I didn't have a smartphone um I
did something recently I tweeted about
this um you may have commented about it
I don't know but this has helped me a
lot um I took an old phone oh um and I
put social media on the old phone yeah
yeah and only social media so it doesn't
operate as a phone I can um airdrop
things to it if so I use that for um
looking at social media and for posting
that phone is in a box and then my my
main phone is for or um texting and
other forms of communication so I still
have that distraction around me but
social media is now a dedicated thing
that I spend a specific amount of time
and I have a timer on that phone that so
I allow I allocate myself a certain
amount of time each day so for every
moment I'm start that timer yeah once it
hits zero that's it and I'm starting to
shorten that amount of time ni the
impact on productivity in terms of
writing in terms of researching in terms
of just dropping into conversation has
been enormous with that um simple switch
um and I just find it easier to just
segregate social media from the phone
the part of the problem is the phone is
it's like a walking office it's not even
it's a phone it's a computer it's a I
mean just too much access well and
here's the thing and this is really gets
back to this idea of engineering your
environment and because so much of our
Lives we're out of control even though
we feel like we're in control right and
it's really if I have a hire or a goal
sometimes you have to do exactly what
you did which is hack your environment
to allow to enable you to regain control
right so what I mean by this is it's
like I even though I might not check my
phone I might have alerts off if I have
a habit I'm thinking about it and every
time I think about it that urge pops
into mind I'm getting a little
distracted I'm losing a little bit of
executive control so you don't even have
to do it right you can just think about
it um so and multitasking is just one
thing there's other things uh uh like uh
one thing is is I talk about in the book
is taking pictures so you've probably
been to concerts I know I have where
it's like you know people are like just
filming the whole things on their phone
or like now you see the rise of
Instagram walls where you go into places
and there's a wall that exists so people
could post to Instagram nothing wrong
with this but most not all the research
interestingly and I can get into why uh
shows that taking pictures actually
impoverishes people's memory really yeah
what about looking at pictures um of um
I think it was Larry Squire when I was
down at San Diego that said that hanging
a few pictures in your office of things
that are really pleasant memories can uh
really enhance your work environment
because you look at them go oh I
remember that thing like because of all
the context it brings about but you're
saying that the the act of taking
pictures depletes our memory for that
experience let me be more specific about
this right so let's say I'm mindlessly
taking pictures so I go in I'm seeing
the Grand Canyon
a lot of people like intuitively on
average will say that they will remember
it better because they took pictures but
what often happens is they're not really
focusing on the distinctive elements of
their experience they're just grabbing
as much stuff as they can right let's
take the concert as another example if
you are filming the concert and you're
just trying
to grab what's being sung
you will have a recording of the concert
but what's the memory you want to have
do you want to have a memory of the song
that you already can stream any time or
do you want the memory of how you felt
the friends you were with the connection
that you had with the artist because you
were there I know this sounds real
hippie dippy but it's real in the sense
that this is what you want to remember I
think at least I don't want to lecture
people if they want to remember taking
pictures of things that's fine I'm sure
everybody remembers taking pictures at
these things but what did you take a
picture of and so you can use the phone
and this is where the studies show good
effects is if I mindfully use the phone
and I say like there's something here
that that will be a good cue that will
remind me later of this great
conversation I focus the camera on that
I take a picture mindfully I use the
camera not as a way of spreading my
attention and just grabbing everything
in the shop approach but rather use it
to find what's distinctive and what's
important and actually Focus me on it
that's a really good thing so what I try
to do is selectively document not overd
doent I'll take a picture of people
laughing or people eating I like to go
to conferences now uh John lisman used
to do this late John lisman and so he
passed away and said I I try to do this
I think more about these things and so I
try to take pictures of people randomly
you know they're drinking a beer and
then they spit out loud laughing or
something like that and these are not
things that are like landmarks they're
not things that are tourist St but they
are great retrieval cues and so what
happens is the next part of it is seeing
the picture well what do you do when you
see the picture right do you scroll
right or do you use it as a cue to
effectively test yourself to recall what
happened during that event and integrate
it now what's interesting is is that act
of recollecting the event in itself will
change the
and it can make it more accessible but
it can also make it a little bit more
abstract and story like and so there is
an interesting tradeoff where you have
these things where you have these
memories and you could even document it
but if you use the the if the more you
retrieve it the more accessible it will
be but sometimes it'll be less immersive
and more like a story that you've told a
hundred times so is it so it sounds like
if we H we go on a uh on a vacation or
to a show or something that take a photo
as long as it's intentional of something
specific that will look the key is to
look at it later not just post it but to
look at it later and to spend a few
moments or more drawing to mind some of
the emotional and um cognitive
experiences around that memory that
however changes the memory right anytime
we create a story we're changing the
memory but perhaps provided it was a
good experience that's better than to
not access the photo at all um but I'm
struck by as you are that the number of
people who are taking photos at a
concert a friend of mine who's a very
successful photographer um who shoots a
lot of photos of musicians thinks this
is the craziest thing as if any one of
those photos is going to be meaningful
right um that they're outside of the
experience of the concert which is
exactly what you're describing maybe you
just have a memory of taking a lot of
photos yeah yeah that's exactly what
happens people will remember something
but it's not their feeling it's not like
the friends they with and what they
talked about you know it's it's more
like you know uh I I Ed this example in
an interview so apologies people already
seen this but it's like uh I just uh I
got to see The Descendants and I'm
guessing since you skateboarded you
probably had heard The Descendants and
the desc yeah yeah yeah exactly so I
grew up listening to them in high school
but I never got to see them because all
the great Brands bands I got into broke
up right before black flag and the
minute man and so forth and so when they
reunited I was like I had an opportunity
to see them in the club uh in uh
Sacramento and so I saw them for the
first time and what was I wasn't one of
the kids taking photos I was actually
watching but then there was a moment
where Bill Stevenson the drummer who's a
super intense guy and really one of the
creative forces behind the band um he
gets up and he starts walking towards
the crowd and Milo's like sit down go
back behind the drums and he's like no I
want to say something and I was like I
got to take a picture of this because
this is going to be like he's really
connecting with us and he talked about
how cool it was to just be able to have
this moment where he's now at this age
able to appreciate this connection that
he has with the audience that he
couldn't appreciate before when he was
younger and I was like I'm taking a
picture of this because that's what I
want to remember you Won't Remember
Everything But if I look at that photo
technically I haven't looked at that
photo again but just taking the picture
of it forced me to really think about
that and that's the biggest takeaway I
have you know a lot of the songs they
played they did a really good job on but
what I really took away from that was
this connection that I had really wanted
when I was a kid you know and
reexperiencing that feeling of being a
kid and hearing these songs when they
were fresh and new for me and so that's
that's I know I'm sounding like kind of
a hippie or something that's not myself
not a you sound like a punk rocker it's
not confus the two that's good yeah
exactly I I
I got a digic all over the place no no
it's I I have a question that that um
I'm hoping bind some of this together um
related to taking photos and memories um
I keep many photos I like printed photos
I have these in a drawer um they mean
very much to me some of them are in the
studio um but I keep most of them in a
drawer at home Polaroids are an
interesting um example I think of what
you're describing the act of taking a
Polaroid is more than just clicking or
pressing with your thumb on a camera
there's a waiting process there's a you
actually get to see the photo emerge
over
time I would bet even though I haven't
run the study I would bet that people
keep Polaroids more than they and look
at Polaroids more than they keep other
photos which if you think about it is um
if it's true if it's true is counter
logic because you know usually people
want to do another photo because they
don't like the way they looked in the
previous photo with Polaroids you can't
do too many of those right it's kind of
one and done maybe two and done but I
feel like the act of taking the the
Polaroid waiting for the photo to emerge
kind of stamps it in your memory of the
experience itself and the act of taking
the photo is more involved it's more of
a process than just a click that then
you see the photo later now of course
with digital photography you see it but
you can take 100 you can take 200 photos
like that if we were to export this
theme of limiting our task
switching as a way to enhance our
memory setting up our environment in a
way where we put our phone away perhaps
or um and we we also are focused on
intention why we are in something do you
think that there's something positively
reinforcing about um getting into a
trench as I call it um because I find
that conversations like this one of the
reasons I do this podcast the solo
episodes and the these interviews is
that um they provide something that my
life prior to it did not provide which
was depth I mean we're just here there's
no phones here and if there are they're
off right and I feel like anytime we go
into these trenches could be a video
game could be an interaction with a
loved one of various kinds and but when
we go into these tunnels of attention
there's something that's so deeply
satisfying about it especially to those
who have attention deficit issues that
it feels like something real happened
and the rest is just noise mhm is there
any relationship of this of the focus
system to release of dopamine I know
release of dopamine can drive Focus but
is the reverse also true that if you're
in a state of focus do you enhance the
release of dopamine correct that's the
question
yeah I well I don't know I I wish I
could give you an answer and say I don't
know um and it would be really hard to
disentangle the Chicken and the Egg
right because if you're measuring
dopamine activity you'd have to well
okay so here's what I can say is that I
think that we often think of you know we
think of like let's say an emotion right
or any other mental state and we think
of it like it just happens but in fact
there's a time scale to these things
right so it's like there is a basic
response that you get when somebody
points a gun at you but then there's an
interpretation that you have that can
take that threat response and make it
into something more and then you're like
really jacking up your noradrenergic
activity right you catastrophizing yeah
but it's like I mean well in that case
it is it could be a catastrophy but if
you survive the you averted the
catastrophe the question is does the
potential catastrophe live within you or
does it die within you you only need to
live within you sufficiently enough that
you avoid the threat in the future right
but that's the that's the the
double-edged sword of norag energic
systems is that they capture lots of
memory and they open up thoughts about
what could have gone wrong yeah but if
it didn't go wrong it didn't go wrong
you're alive you only need to remember
to avoid whatever puts you in that
circumstance yeah but that that can
still be scary right sure and and this
is where I think it's like this uh we
talked about this before this appraisal
is very important you know um in the
case of focus it's a little bit
different but just to make this very
concrete the prefrontal cortex has top
down inputs to many of the
neuromodulatory systems so on average
people tend to think of the
neuromodulatory systems like dopamine
and neopine phrine as being very bottom
up they just send signals everywhere and
set the brain into Focus or not focus or
whatever uh but the prefrontal cortex
has some anatomically at least some
capability of regulating those systems
both directly and indirectly and so that
does I think speak to this idea that if
you have a very strong gold Focus you
can in fact Reg regulate the dopamine
system I I think it's a reasonable and
nor norrine to noradrenergic system so I
think it's a reasonable thing and i' I
bet you Amy arston has done some related
work on this topic I'll check it out
earlier you mentioned and I want to make
sure that we return to um this notion of
taking care of one's vision and one's
hearing as a way to offset memory loss
very important Concepts um could you
share with us what's known about that
this is just starting to be a thing but
the effect sizes for instance for
hearing raids are really strong both in
reducing ad risk I believe and in
Alzheimer's dementia Alzheimer's risk
and in just good cognitive aging and
keeping your memory as you get older so
to your headphones too loud yes this
what right well actually okay so
speaking of things I did to preserve my
brain health I'm playing in a band now
and we're pretty damn loud and so I got
I went to an audiologist and I got uh
custom earplugs oh yeah yeah all the top
music I'm friends with some some really
amazing musicians they all wear insert
earplugs oh yeah yeah but I think these
custom ones will be more effective at
both preserving the spectrum of all the
frequencies so oh I just mean protect
your hearing yeah yeah no but yeah but
they're related because if you can't
hear your frequencies you might end up
turning up and you get this paradoxical
sure thing so too much information I
know but basically that is yeah so uh
there is this issue with in fact
actually there's an article that the
Shai sent me on in the Lancet that one
of their uh um Public Health
recommendations is to get into a
preventative mode for preventing
Alzheimer's disease and one of the
things they say is screen for hearing
and give people hearing aids and and
make people use them if they have
encourage people to use them uh vision
is starting to be a big one people who
are older get cataracts get it treated
you know um a lot of this preventative
health care which we our system is not
really equipped for it but can really
save so much money it can save so much
emotional pain for so many people it's
really amazing another one we me I
mentioned briefly is oral hygiene gum
disease it turns out increases your risk
for I believe it's Alzheimer's and also
for cognitive brain health in general I
did an episode on oral health and the
effects on as you said on brain health
are amazing because streptococus mutans
which is the bacteria that causes
cavities um Can funnel its way into the
bloodstream and potentially cross the
blood brain barrier which is I think why
people think it might be detrimental to
brain health yeah yeah I mean I don't
know the detailed mechanisms but I I
think that makes sense and there's this
vague notion of cognitive Reserve which
is basically some people seem to be
quite immune to the effects of cognitive
aging and some people seem to be very
protected against Alzheimer's so what is
it one of the things that seems to come
up as as far as depleting cognitive
Reserve or putting at higher risk seems
to be um inflammation right
neuroinflammation and and uh so Kim
mallister as you know was doing work on
on this topic of neuroimmune
interactions and basically the immune
system expresses itself in the brain you
get microa activation that can cause
these inflammatory responses and there's
reasonable evidence suggests that it's
interacting with toao and Amid and and
this kind of cascade of stuff that
happens in Alzheimer's disease right and
one of the things that we we're learning
now and we don't know nearly enough but
the data out there is quite scary in
fact is long covid is associated with
significant cognitive effects and brain
is that uh the explanation for the brain
fog that people report many many months
so they they report a subjective brain
fog and you can see this you can measure
this as a significant cognitive deficit
that they're experiencing right and
we've seen in the past like HIV was
there is actually a whole variety of
dementia that was associated with HIV
from the viral transmission um we can
like you can see with multiple sclerosis
where you have like autoimmune uh
responses in the brain affect mental
function dramatically we're seeing more
and more evidence of this and so this is
again another one of those things it's
like people go oh co I don't care about
it blah blah blah I mean this is a
health thing that can really affect
people and it can I don't think anybody
it's not a political issue to get brain
fog it's just sucks right nobody wants
this so I think that there's a lot we're
learning about viruses and bacteria one
of the the cool things I was talking
about before we started recording is um
I was at a conference I met the coolest
guy and I'm blanking on his name but
I'll send it to you Afters um but he's
uh he did this great study and he was
studying the effects of nutrition on
brain health and memory especially
cognition and so I what's the most
interesting finding that you've gotten I
love to ask people this because I'm
curious and it stimulates my curiosity
and I usually get a good answer so he
told me he did this study where he has
these rats and he gives them sugary
water during the day about the
equivalent he said to a can of Coke a
day so they're getting this sugar when
they reach adulthood you know these
teenage rats they reach adulthood and
they have memory problems and they do
they have hippocampal atrophy so you go
okay well the hippocampus is affected
memory is affected sugar blah blah blah
no problem so then what he does is he
takes the gut bacteria from the sugar
animals and put in an animal that
doesn't get this diet and he finds the
same kind of pathology and the same kind
of memory deficit in these animals so
there's something about that process of
like the gut brain interaction that also
seems to be playing a part in ways that
I don't understand I think they're still
figuring it out but again this this
really shows this tight neuroimmune link
you know we're seeing this now with
pollution air pollution is a big factor
so even if people don't believe in
global warming there nothing good about
being in a place with a lot of smoke in
the air you know it's uh it definitely
can and this is one of the risk factors
that is noted in the Lancet report for
Alzheimer's disease um one of my
colleagues uh Pam L is doing research on
this at UC Davis showing that you get
like she actually takes real pollution
from the calicott tunnel which connects
Oakland and and uh Walnut Creek yeah and
uh finds that rats exposed to this
pollution have hi cample damage and uh
um so it's there's so many of these
environmental factors that can trigger
the inflammatory response we talked
about blood sugar blood sugar also seems
to be related to these issues so um and
diabetes is like so bad in so many ways
it It's associated with those white
matter hyperintensities that we talk
about and so that's bad we've done some
research on that and but it also affects
um it can cause little uh you can get if
you get severe diabetes keto acidosis
you can actually have hyp hipocampal
damage from that directly and it also
dramatically increases Alzheimer's risk
an epidemic of diabetes right now this
probably explains um at least to my mind
why um these lifestyle factors like
improve sleep um cardiovascular and
resistance training exercise but
certainly cardiovascular exercise you
know um uh eating a lot of leafy leafy
foods Etc um we know all of those things
offset inflammation to some degree or
another right I mean one of the best
ways to inflame your brain and body is
to not get enough sleep and eat you know
a lot of Highly processed foods for
instance um to date are there any even
semi satisfactory prescription drugs or
other compounds that can slow the
progression of Alzheimer's dementia once
it's started there are now some drugs
that are um I think they're targeting
amalo that are producing some modest
effects in stalling the progression of
the disease see the problem with
Alzheimer's as you know is once you lose
neurons you're not getting them back
right and it's like yeah there's
neurogenesis and you can run around but
it's not it's not much it's not you
don't want to if you're depending on
that you're hosed you know so um like
but getting back to the exercise thing
it's neuroprotective and so like let's
say with a drug right I mean everybody
wants a drug if I told you give you this
drug you're 60 years old and it's going
to have some terrible side effects
you're going to get diarrhea nausea all
this stuff but it'll reduce your risk of
Alzheimer's by 40% a lot of people would
be motivated to take it now I tell you
okay well here's a lifestyle
intervention that's going to involve
what Sarah medin calls down States
doesn't have we can actually get into
that and and memory reactivation during
down States but um uh involves sleep
diet exercise exerise social stimulation
right and these things by the way also
reinforce each other having better sleep
makes it easier to EXC having exercise
makes easier better to sleep all of
these improve mood right so these will
improve your mental function your mood
as well as your mental function
relatively soon and reduce your risk by
at least 40% if not more wow um if you
go to I can send you this Lancet article
but it's like the amount the proportion
of variance meaning the degree of risk
that you can reduce with fully
preventable or fully in our control
lifestyle issues is huge it's as big or
bigger than the
genetics I think people really need to
hear and internalize that because I
think everyone's waiting for this
miracle drug that is unlikely to ever
arrive frankly I mean you know to dat we
have some okay treatments for
Parkinson's to try and offset the loss
of dopaminergic neurons but they can
even transplant essentially dopaminergic
neurons into the substantia but
none of those things alopa Etc have
proved to be cures for Parkinson's um
not getting hit in the head is helpful
oh yeah yeah traumatic brain injury is
another one of the big risk factors so
there are a lot of don'ts yeah I'm
grateful that today you're sharing a
number of Dos both in the context of
offsetting age relay cognitive decline
Alzheimer's but also in terms of how to
enhance focus and enhance memory um I
want to make make sure that we um touch
on a few topics related to memory that a
little bit um off the the trajectory
we're on now but that come up a lot when
people start thinking about memory and
one that's kind of um intriguing very
intriguing is deja vu do we have any
understanding about what Deja Vu is is
it just like a recollection of something
similar that spontaneously gets
triggered um I'm like what is deja vu
well it's not fully understood but I'll
give you my best guess that's
science-based and not just my wildly
speculating completely but basically uh
one of the early findings that gave you
sense about what Deja Vu is is hings
Jackson who is this great neurologist
who um did pioneering work in Behavioral
Neurology observed that many patients
who get epilepsy would have this Aura
it's this mental Sensations right before
a seizure where they would get an
intense feeling of deja vu it doesn't
happen in everyone but a certain
and this is associated with temporal
lobe epilepsy and the hippocampus as you
know is in the temporal lobe but there's
also these areas around it that are
super important for memory um um
including the amydala but also really
the peronal cortex is is a key key
player in this and so the um so then uh
you have Wilder Penfield and other
people who started to do these surgeries
for epilepsy and they said well I want
to make sure I'm not taking out good
brain right you don't want so Penfield
wasn't responsible for hm and that was
like kind of an irresponsible surgery hm
is a is a now dead famous patient and
literally chapter in the history of
Neuroscience somebody who um had his
hippocamp high bilaterally one on each
side of the brain uh removed to treat
epilepsy um it fixed the epilepsy but he
had uh lost all capacity to uh remember
prior events yeah and so in fact he had
this dense dense Amnesia right and
actually one of the little known things
even in memory research is he actually
lost he had what's called a temporal
leomy where they just hack off the front
part of the temporal lber it might have
been cauterized I I can't remember the
ex I think he cauterized it but anyway
they do that temporal leomy and he
actually had the posterior onethird of
his hippocampus but he had lost his
perir rhinal cortex bilateral
and that turned out to be Betsy Murray
at NIH later and other people should
turned out to be huge thing so one of
the reasons I think that he became so
densely amnestic is that it was
bilateral so if you think about the
brain like you have a side of the brain
that's causing a seizures so you kind of
got a spare tire on the other side where
it's like that other healthy tissue on
the other side can sometimes pick up the
slack but if you take out both
hemispheres now you're in really bad
shape so Scoville did that you actually
did it for people who are hm had
epilepsy and it was a legit operation in
that sense but he did it for people who
had I think like psychosis to depression
I mean back then they just did all kinds
of crazy stuff so um uh but Penfield was
like no I want to make sure I take out
only the tissue that needs to go so what
do you do you stimulate different parts
of the brain and you see does it produce
anything other than a seizure and if so
that's not an area you want to remove
and so he would go into the anterior
temporal lobes and stimulate and people
would have sometimes they would have an
intense real memory but sometimes they
would have this intense sense of deja vu
where it's like they feel this I feel
like I'm lived out this whole thing
that's happening right now I've lived it
before when you know that's not true
right so what is this well a number of
people my lab was heavily involved with
this and Andy yenis that UC Davis was
you know really Central to a lot of the
stuff found that the perir rhinal cortex
which is this area as I said it's a big
player with the hip campus seems to be
very critical for this General sense of
familiarity that we have and so you know
I use in the book an example of like if
I say have you eaten a rambutan before
now you being a worldly guy might have
you ever eaten a rambutan no I don't
know what that is okay so how quick was
it that you were able to say no that you
were able to think about go I've never
eaten Rutan uh less than a second okay
so you didn't have to search your entire
memory for whether or not you've eaten
romitan you know because it's so
unfamiliar right so things that are
highly familiar like you know maybe I'll
ask have you eat a banana before or
grapes before you can say yes because
and partly you wouldn't even have to
remember any instance it just feels
right you know those are very familiar
things to you have you ever seen a grape
before yes of course you have right
Apple very familiar to people so we just
have that General fluency you can look
at this like I've um you go into the
grocery store and you see someone and
you're like I know I've seen this person
before where have I seen them before and
then you leave and eventually you're
like oh well that was somebody who I met
at this conference or something like
that but you weren't expecting them at
this context it's and no episodic memory
is triggered but there was something
about their features that felt very
fluent and natural to you and triggered
that sense of familiarity
and that seems to be processed and you
can see brain activity associated with
that in the perinal cortex and people
with damage to the perinal cortex seem
to not differentiate between the
rambutan and the banana it's all kind of
unfamiliar to them they might remember
I've eaten a banana but they don't
necessarily have that sense of
familiarity and Rebecca Burwell at Brown
University the coolest experiment that
doesn't nearly get you know how in
science you get these unsung hero
experiments well what this was one of
them where she stimulated in rats uh the
peronal cortex at this frequency called
the beta frequency which is kind of a
relatively low frequency oscillation and
basically put two objects in front of
the the animal and so like typically if
there's a new object the animal will
spend more time like exploring it right
and depending on how she timed the
stimulation she could make the animal
think that a familiar object was novel
she stimulates at a different frequency
I think it was gamma and the animal now
thinks uh uh or actually was like yeah
so she thinks now the Animal thinks that
a familiar thing is novel with beta was
that it thought a novel thing was
familiar wow so could literally use this
stimulation to change the way the animal
is interacting with in presumably a
memory driven way with this object right
so for those looking for novelty in
different domains of life maybe this is
the solution maybe yeah and so uh an
clear just to close the loop here who's
a great researcher of Colorado State
developed this beautiful Paradigm where
what she does is she said okay well does
that relate to Deja Vu well let's see so
what she did was use virtual reality and
so in virtual reality you can create
these environments and you know put
objects in particular places and so she
creates these virtual environments where
there are particular objects in
particular places and let's say one's a
museum right so a person can go through
passively and watch a movie or they
actively navigate through these spaces
and then what she does is she has them
go through let's say a video arcade but
unbeknownst to the subject the objects
that are in the room are an exactly the
same positions as the objects in the
museum but it's a video arcade so it
looks different but the room shape the
spatial a you know everything is
identical it just it's got a different
skin on it so to speak for video Gamers
so what happens is people are much more
likely very likely to produce a Deja Vu
sensation when they're in these places
these virtual environments that look
very much like where they've been but
they're mismatching in some critical way
so it's like you've got enough to
trigger the strong sense of familiarity
but the mismatch is suppressing
recollection and so that seems to be a
crucial part of why you get this uncanny
feeling of remembering is the strong
familiarity you get and by the way I've
watched these movies and I cannot for
the life of me see that the museum is
the same as the arcade it just feels so
different cognitively but you know I can
imagine being like if I really did it
immersively having that sense of
familiarity so you're really pitting
these things in opposition to each other
so what likely happens with Deja Vu is
something uncanny that triggers a little
bit of memory retrieval or a strong
wrong fluency but then there's a
mismatch that suppresses it and prevents
that a context from coming up I'd like
to talk about the relationship between
memory and mental health um for the
following reason um I'm very struck by
the fact that in experiments um such as
the work that Carl dyser off who was a
actually the first guest on this podcast
brilliant um neuroeng engineer of course
and psychiatrist described which um he's
talking to a a patient who's depressed
um this patient has a stimulator for the
vagus nerve they can crank up
stimulation the Vegas nerve and and
essentially The Narrative goes from this
patient I believe it was a woman in this
case talking about being suicidally
depressed she can't anticipate doing
anything of any interest or excitement
to her increasing vagal stimulation
which by the way folks does not just
calm people down vagal stimulation
actually creates a lot of alertness so
this is a a vast misconception out there
um that vagel stimulation is all about
calming in any case as the vagel
stimulation goes up her narrative
literally changes in real time to yeah I
could see myself going out and applying
for a job I'm kind of excited about the
future Etc so complete transformation of
one's Outlook but also in some instances
memory of Prior events so how we cast
prior events is so interesting and the
bridge I'd like to to uh build right now
conceptually is is that there are two
papers that um intrigue me one is a a
paper from lamberto maf's Lab in
Pisa which had a paradigm for exploring
learned helplessness in rodents which is
sort of a model for depression uh how
long rodent is willing to swim in water
to save its life right before it gives
up and there's a learned helplessness
that eventually arrives these yes are
not kind experiments um but at some
point they give up and then they they've
essentially learned they're helpless and
of course they save the animal before it
dies but these animals given a
essentially an SSRI like prac um
Can restore some sense of hope meaning
they'll swim longer after having learned
to be helpless okay is it recovery of
depression we don't know but in humans
you see some of the same thing when
ssris have been effective and they're
not always effective you also see this
in some of the psilocybin trials where
people have done the psilocybin therapy
talk about that in the correct context
and now all of a sudden people have this
completely different emotional version
of the same events like yep a bunch of
terrible things happened or with the
MDMA trials for PTSD controversial right
now FDA didn't approve it but a good
number of patients describe saying yeah
this really terrible set of things that
happened those happened but I accept it
and I'm taking the lessons and I'm
moving on and and there's maybe even
forgiveness etc etc so to me this is a
this is a shift in memory brought about
by a dramatic shift in neuromodulators
ssris of course increas serotonin Sil
cybin increases serotonin and it's
interesting to me that MDMA while it
increases dopamine most dramatically
increases
serotonin like 7x or more in terms of
the now I'm not suggesting anyone do
these drugs at all you can blow out the
serotonergic system with too much of it
with too much of too much MDA ma
although the studies on this is
interesting because the study that
claimed that MD MDMA did that actually
was retracted science it turns out they
had inadvertently used methamphetamine
oh jeez keep in mind folks that MDMA is
methylene dioxy methamphetamine so I'm
not suggesting anyone do these drugs I'm
using this as a as a conceptual temp I
mean this is abuse we're talking about
to not like right right I mean so in
clinical trials it's clearly been shown
both for ssris as well as for psilocybin
these are still emerging clinical trials
and MDMA that in a significant
percentage of individuals especially
when combined with therapy people can
now feel differently about the same
memory so feeling different about the
same memory and feeling different about
therefore the sense of possibility going
forward this to me is incredible and it
speaks to the fact that much of
depression the lack of a positive
anticipation about the future Etc is
based on memories about failures of past
yeah or harms of past yeah rumination
basically right so what is the
relationship between the serotonin
system system and memory or what is the
relationship more broadly of the these
neuromodulatory systems or the vagal
system that can create these incredible
like reversals of what we previously
thought of as terrible as like
manageable and therefore we're willing
to lean into life again what is that
again you know serotonin's like a
neuromodulator it enhances
plasticity and uh what I mean by that is
is that if you have like a transient
learning event you will get a change in
the connections between neurons that
were active during that event and super
interesting work right now going on in
behavioral time scale plasticity and all
this stuff so it's not just cells that
wire together fire it's more interesting
actually or fire together wire together
it's more interesting
but those changes can often be transient
and what people so like uh Eric kandell
for instance one who studied uh
serotonin in particular emphasized this
but basically many neurom modul
if you give a little bath of these bathe
these neurons in in uh um serotonin or
other neurom modulators you stabilize
that plasticity and that allows you know
increases in receptor density between
these neurons that allow them to
communicate more effectively now you can
get weakening in LTD too we won't get
into that but uh but serotonin
definitely promotes plasticity right and
so one of the things I talk about in my
book is that memories are I mean we all
have plasticity as I said retrieving a
memory can allow us to change the memory
in certain ways and it can change when
you get into the details of it it
becomes complicated in interesting ways
but the short version is you can change
it we get a small part of what happened
when we remember but there's that
feeling of the context there's that
emotional response that we have that's
both a kind of a basic raw motivational
my heart's racing or something like that
that's why people often say well emotion
emotional memories are stored in the
body well it's just part of the memory
it's a retrieval cue so to speak and it
can be also be part of the retrieved
experience but you have all these
factors going on that are part of this
emotional memory and then you have a
story that you create a narrative that
you use to make sense of it and that
affects all these physiological systems
too right so every time I used I talk in
the book about an example of how group
therapy is so powerful as a means of
memory updating social interactions
where it's like people can change the
narrative they say well you know I gave
you this narrative about how I'm loud
and you told well I remember hanging out
with you and you weren't loud then
you're not loud now and so now I can
update these memories maybe byous yeah
exactly I could I reframe it right and
these framing effects are huge so in
theory people can take and experience
those traumatic and many people do and
say this made me who I am and I'm happy
with who I am now even though it's a
horrible thing I'm stronger for it or
I'm a Survivor or you know I couldn't
have done anything about it and it's not
my fault and or you can have these
narratives of Shame and so forth and and
guilt and anger and so forth nothing's
I'm not judging anybody's reaction to
trauma but what I am saying is that's
part of the emotional response it's part
of the memory that people construct the
problem is is that with trauma memories
when they do stick it's hard to change
because there's so much plasticity
driven by the neuromodulators during
that event with PTSD we could talk about
that that's a whole another thing but
just let's just take traumatic memories
there's it's so intense and the amydala
response drives the physiology in many
cases of that arousal which makes you
feel like this immediacy of it right and
it affects sleep and nightmares all but
anyway stay out of PTSD for a moment
because that's a whole another thing but
those memories are very
resistant because of that intensity and
often the more we retrieve them we ret
traumatize oursel so reframing in a
cognitive therapy sense is very
difficult because they feel this and
their brain is telling them I'm under
threat or I'm ashamed because they've
reinforced this narrative so many times
and you can work through the logic but
sometimes times you need to create some
big prediction error to generate some
error driven learning which is something
we can talk about or you need to some
kind of help so if you're driving
neuromodulatory systems like that
theoretically could give you a broader
window plasticity in fact actually we're
trying Prozac on my dog and one of the
things that uh that I've seen she's very
anxious and very like uh like she'll
just and it's to the point where she'll
not exercise even though she's very
active dog she'll stop on a walk if she
hears a garbage truck anywhere and so
it's a very low dose and I'm not I'm not
necessarily saying go drag your dogs but
I'm just saying that the story that I've
heard is is that you get this period of
plasticity where you can kind of rewrite
some of these behavioral patterns and
make them more open to training and so
forth and so it doesn't even have to be
a permanent thing right and I think a
lot of these things like you're talking
about learn helplessness study is
probably transient if effects of not
being on it for years or something but
it's not very effective in terms of
ssris but soloc cybin and psychedelics
have shown a lot of Promise as being
bigger effects right and these produce
massive plasticity there's two things I
think that are really interesting about
it so my neighbor DAV by the way Davis I
will just say I'm biased but it's one of
the top three places in the world for
learning and memory research so next
door d David Olson it turns out is
studying psychedelic effects on
plasticity and and um you know so he
really emphasizes that there's just
these massive neurotrophic factors bdnf
like all these factors that are going on
that are promoting plasticity and you
know for people who've taken them that's
what they report is that there's this
period of integration afterwards where
your brain's just like you know you can
feel it everything's you change you
change yeah you change if if the
integration is guided properly one thing
that I do want to make sure I highlight
and it's not just for you know public
safety reasons although that as well is
that people are so intrigued by the idea
of quote unquote opening
plasticity plasticity is just an
opportunity for learning new
contingencies yeah right just taking
psychedelics is an experience but um
certainly but the learning of new
contingencies occurs in the integration
phase as well as within the session
that's why the clinical trials that
showed some efficacy for some people
were guided intensely by therapists but
the mere Act of having plasticity
plasticity is an opportunity for
learning it's not the actual learning
that's right it it opens up like
significant opportunities for reshaping
uh but the second part of it which maybe
I think is is really interesting is
there is also a dissociative element of
these drugs so ketamine isn't a
psychedelic but I think there are some
interesting plasticity effects and and
definitely it produces this dissociative
element too but um with uh a
psychedelics there's often a major
perspective shift and perspective is
hugely important for memory because a
lot of our sense of the emotional impact
of our memory is based on a perspective
that we adopt when we remember and
research has shown that you can take the
same encoding event meaning like I tell
you a story let's just take a very
simple thing uh very you know I give you
a story and it's like I tell you now
viewed from the perspective Ive of
someone else and you're trying to
remember it you can remember things that
you didn't exper remember the first time
around changing your perspective can
literally change what you remember it
can also change the narrative that you
produce so now let's say you pull up
this traumatic memory but you're viewing
it from the outside you're feeling your
hearts racing your eyes are dilating
there just crazy effects for psychedelic
but you're seeing it and it's not you
there's some Deeper Self you're feeling
whether it's true or not or you have a
sense of agency in there yeah some of
this ad delics um I've never tried this
one um uh but there are interesting
studies of ibigan iboga where the
universal uh experiences I understand is
that PE it's 22 hours long it's actually
a cardiovascular risk there's some
things that need to be offset there so
don't run out and do this folks but
people I'm told get a
highdefinition movie of specific events
in their life that actually happened
only when they close their eyes so no
hallucinating with eyes open interesting
and then they have agency within those
movies and once they exact the change
they wanted to have it rotates like a
cube very interesting perhaps to a
memory researcher why this would be and
then they get another event of past
where they have agency in that event
incredible it's I mean you know there's
so much that we don't know and I think
it's you know and I I will say that some
of the Psychedelic stuff is overhyped
and there's not some of the science is
quite bad in that field right now sum
papers are being retracted now yeah yeah
I do think that some of the concerns
they had in the FDA I take issue with
but what I will say is is that um you
have a drug that dramatically increases
plasticity but it changes dramatically
the mental context that you have when
you pull up the memory so you have a
real opportunity for memory updating now
there's a phenomenon in the animal
literature called
reconsolidation where essentially the
ACT of retrieving a memory opens it up
to requiring some kinds of uh um
neuromodulators again to really promote
resealing of the memory so to speak but
it can also if you interrupt it you can
erase the memories and theoretically if
you can do that you could also change
the memories pretty significantly so if
I can vividly access some neural
population that's giving me this
normally gives me this physiological
response it sets off this train of
thoughts and it's associated with this
physical and mental
context and I can dramatically I can
access those neurons but dramatically
reshape the context and dramatically
reshape The Narrative I've created the
opportunity for massive change and I
don't know if that's true but it sure
makes sense to me that that's the case
now having said that if you and me share
our traumatic elements of our childhood
I'm sure we could go out for drit and do
this for quite a few hours right that in
and of itself will also produce some
change in our memories it's very
powerful and I saw this in the clinic
where I was doing group therapy with
Vietnam vets and I'm like I'm a total
fraud I'm like I don't know 27 years old
28 years old and I'm like in with these
like you know Vietnam vets in their 50s
who've really seen stuff you know and
they live in combat zones now in Chicago
and what I realized
was everyone was telling their
story but they're hearing reflections of
their story from me but also from other
members of the group who they can relate
to that are different from their
narrative and now all of a sudden what
happens is the memory is no longer
theirs it's a collective memory that's
shared by all these people because the
memory now incorporates elements of
their reactions as well
it allows people to remember it in a new
context right and I mean and we can just
take a much more watered down version of
this where how many times have you had a
terrible experience and it became a
great story I basically say that there's
no point in having a bad experience in
life if you don't get a great story out
of it right so I talk to the book about
a near-death experience I had paddle
boarding and as everything about this
was stupid it's like the degree I could
send you pictures of it you oh my God
what was he thinking you I've made I've
made uh foolish errors in um uh Outdoor
Adventures in my past where afterwards I
thought that was a really dumb move to
even go to
that location to dive let alone what we
did when we did there like you know I
mean the some of the stupid stuff that
we did um even and as kids like bridge
jumps and without testing water depth I
mean stupid stupid stuff yeah um that I
don't recommend anyone repeat but you're
right the the uh surviving stories are
uh you carry those forward yeah yeah
exactly exactly problem is the other
stories we can talk about people who are
paralyzed dead etc those stories exist
too yeah yeah and well so I mean to be
clear it's like I felt horrible during
that experience and it was one of the
most immediately fear inducing
experiences I've had but later me and
Randy O'Reilly the computational
Neuroscience were friends we both did
this stupid thing together we would tell
the the story tag team it you know we
told it to students and friends and so
forth and it just became
funny and so each time we told it it
just became kind of funnier and funnier
and you start to embellish things and so
forth and so that change of perspective
was really drawn out by sharing and
seeing people laugh and seeing people
like what were you thinking you're such
a smart person and you did this and and
it becomes part of the narrative and you
know keep in mind there are people who
do this that they say like I had a
really traumatic experience but I've
learned from it I've had a horrible
emotionally abusive relationship but
I've learned from it right and I don't
mean to trivialize anybody's experience
who didn't have that thing and they're
just traumatized by it and they carry it
with them but what I am saying is is
that the memory so to speak I think in
Neuroscience right now there's a big Hot
Topic about engrams as if a bunch of
neurons is the memory but every time we
have a memory we're painting a new
picture
we're creating a new novel well and I
think this is where people have to be
very careful not to um Cowboy uh
post-traumatic stress disorder treatment
in a way that um allows the narrative to
make it worse because people um we
previous guest on this podcast has this
notion of um in describing this of of
story fondling where people can go
further and further into the description
of how terrible something is reinforced
by others and then the memory changes to
become much worse than either the real
events were or just simply worse within
their body and mind and then they have
to live that forward so it can go both
ways which is really points to the key
uh uh which is to do this with really
trained professionals yeah yeah and it's
it's all about like because you can
retraumatization is so bad in depression
is because you recall a negative memory
and that gets you in a negative mood
because you pull up the context and then
that makes it easier to recall more
negative memories and then every time
you recall them now they're getting more
power because they're associated with
these negative mov so recollection is
really a double-edged blade oh yeah yeah
I mean look at like so if you take
something like reminiscence or um
Nostalgia so the original term Nostalgia
I credit phelipe ad Bard for tell he's a
philosopher neuroscientist he he uh told
me that uh Nostalgia used to be a term
for a disease that was coined by a Swiss
physician and he used it to talk about a
kind
post-traumatic experience that soldiers
had where they would get so wistful
about their home that it just made them
miserable in the places that they were
at it's um been referred to as the pain
of an old wound yeah yeah yeah exactly I
didn't say that someone else yeah yeah
and uh um so it can the research shows
it can have very positive effects on
Mental Health right and it can have
positive effects on Mental Health if you
use that as a way of saying hey this is
just a great thing that's happened I'm
grateful for that but it can become
toxic if you're like my life used to be
so great and now it's terrible even if
it's positive reminiscence if you come
into it with the wrong
attributions it can become negative and
toxic and it can contaminate your
present right I mean the past has got
good and it's got bad in it just like
the present has got good and it's got
bad in it and it's really all about what
what are the narratives you're
constructing for it in many ways and
that plays a big part in the dynamic
malleable constantly shape-shifting
nature of memory
incredible I want to make sure that we
talk about
something at first glance very different
than all of this um but it land squarely
in the conversation we've had until now
which is your love for and your um
participation in rock and
uh you have a band right pavlovas dogs
yep I actually have a couple bands now
thankfully so okay what are the other
ones called well so Pavlov's dogs also
say ver is like a a band of
neuroscientists and and psycholog
neuroscientists who met actually most of
us met at a memory meeting actually and
so uh we get together at conferences and
we'll rent out a club and we'll play
basically uh we uh Brad calls it skinny
TI music it's it's like is it original
music or covers covers that one's a
cover band covers okay um and so uh
we'll play like the Ramones The Clash
gang of four great um it's it's a a lot
of we're you know we added Blondie and
um she's still touring yeah she's
amazing is a friend of mine went on tour
with her yeah there's a band called surf
surfbort was on tour with I know them
yeah oh that's a friend Danny from
surfboard know yeah the great band um
and she tour with blondie Blondie's
amazing she's still super vivacious as a
surfboard and and um uh and Danny um
what instrument do you play I play
guitar and I also do vocals lead vocals
uh yes or yeah and uh reluctant because
sometimes it's talking or being off key
but yeah can people find um links to any
Pavlov dog live shows or recordings
online I think we have some recordings
on YouTube and if you look on our
Facebook page um maybe our Instagram too
we have live recordings okay and you
have a show coming up put a link to that
it's um because people will listen to
this long after that um presumably
that's coming up in Chicago on October I
think it's the 7th is it a mon it's the
Monday we'll put a link to that yeah
sorry but for those that can't make it
because most of us aren't in Chicago
including me unfortunately um we'll keep
an eye out for uh Pavlov's dogs um I
love that you play music and I just have
for sake of time one question about your
love for rock and roll and playing music
music when you're playing rock and
roll live are you thinking about
anything else sometimes and that's when
I
suck actually you know one thing one
hack that I came up with because it's
like with the cover I me we practice
like we cram it's not the worst thing
it's not space learning it's like we we
go through the songs and we keep adding
and taking away songs but it's like
we'll cram for like I don't know about
eight hours of practices over three days
or something and so it's for me it's
like a constant memory thing because my
brain doesn't want to play covers it
wants to play the songs that I've
written and so there's always this
memory thing it's and then I get nervous
I get really nervous and so I move a lot
and then that distract and then I'll see
friends and that kills me because then I
start thinking what are they thinking
and so I started last show I did with
Pavlov's dogs I wore sunglasses and it
was great it was because then I wasn't
attuned to them and I was it just goes
back to what we're talking about kind of
with the camera and stuff I was feeling
it and I was thinking I was I was not I
was in the flow in the zone and feeling
it and doing it and not thinking about
it and there's a whole interesting
literature choking under pressure that
actually relates to this idea of like
you know sometimes having too much
cognitive control going on is like
really bad when you're under stress and
if you know something fairly well you're
going to be better off if if you just go
into an automatic State I love that um
when I do live shows I like to have the
um house lights relatively dim I don't
want to see anybody at first and then as
I get more comfortable I'm happy to have
the house lights come up you play I
didn't know you I don't play anything I
do live events where I talk about
science where I tell stories about
science and scientists um okay a couple
of things are right in the front of my
mind and I'd be remiss if I didn't say
them right now first of all it's
absolutely clear that we need to get you
back here for more discussion about
memory and learning there's just so much
that we didn't have the opportunity to
cover in this conversation but we
most certainly will in a future
conversation we didn't bring up the
turkeys of Davis not the T no we didn't
um second of all I I want to thank you
for writing your book why we remember
because it's a fantastic exploration of
the modern understanding of memory um
still some of the Mysteries that remain
but um this is a field that's evolved a
lot and and you capture so much of the
incredible findings there over the years
um in a very uh pleasurable way so it's
it's a pleasure to read and then also
want to thank you for coming here today
to share with us your understanding
about memory and also your sharing of
your experience uh with ADHD and some of
the tools you use some of the struggles
I think um all too often people hear
about these you know scientists or
Physicians or people who are authorities
on a topic and they um don't hear about
the the challenges they face and I
assure you that a great great many
people U will appreciate the fact that
you yourself have have struggled with
certain issues related to attention but
that you've overcome them at least as
well to be able to be a functional
parent and familyman Professor author uh
now public educator dog owner a second
time around and um you know for that and
for a great many other reasons uh you've
educated us and you've given us a great
many practical tools it's also great to
see you as a fellow punk rocker and old
friend um and I even let you call me
Andy so thank thank you
so thanks for coming here today and
please do come back again Char oh I
would love to thank you Andrew it's just
been great to be here thank you for
joining me for today's discussion about
memory and ADHD with Dr charin rangano
to learn more about his work and to find
a link to his book as well as social
media accounts please see the links in
the show note captions if you're
learning from and or enjoying this
podcast please subscribe to our YouTube
channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way
to support us in addition please
subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify
and apple and on both Spotify and apple
you can leave us up to a f-star review
please check out the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning and throughout today's
episode that's the best way to support
this podcast if you have questions for
me or comments about the podcast or
guests or topics that you'd like me to
consider for the hubman Lab podcast
please put those in the comment section
on YouTube I do read all the comments
for those of you that haven't heard I
have a new book coming out it's my very
first book it's entitled protocols an
operating manual for the human body this
is a book that I've been working on for
more than 5 years and that's based on
more than 30 years of research and
experience and it covers protocols for
everything from sleep to exercise to
Stress Control protocols related to
focus and motivation and of course I
provide the scientific substantiation
for the protocols that are included the
book is now available by pre-sale at
protocols book.com there you can find
links to various vendors you can pick
the one that you like best again the
book is called protocols an operating
manual for the human body if you're not
already following me on social media I
am hubman lab on all social media
platforms so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter threads Facebook and
Linkedin and on all those platforms I
discuss science and science related
tools some of which overlaps with the
content of the hubman Lab podcast but
much of which is distinct from the
content on the hubman Lab podcast again
that's huberman lab on all social media
channels if you haven't already
subscribed to our neural network
newsletter our neural network newsletter
is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that
includes podcast summaries as well as
protocols in the form of brief 1 to
three page PDFs those protocol PDFs are
on things like neuroplasticity and
learning optimizing dopamine improving
your sleep deliberate cold exposure
deliberate heat exposure we have a
foundational Fitness protocol that
describes a template routine that
includes cardiovascular training and
resistance training with sets and Reps
all backed by science and all of which
again is completely zero cost to
subscribe simply go to huberman lab.com
go to the menu tab up in the upper right
corner scroll down a newsletter and
provide your email and I should
emphasize that we do not share your
email with anybody thank you once again
for joining me for today's discussion
with Dr charin rangano and last but
certainly not least thank you for your
interest in science
[Music]