welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Mark
Brackett Dr Mark Brackett is a professor
of psychology at Yale University and the
director of the Yale Center for
emotional intelligence he is one of the
world's foremost experts on emotions
meaning what emotions are and how they
regulate our relationship to oursel and
others today's discussion gets heavily
into how we should think about our
emotions and the emotional expressions
of others and when and how we should
regulate those emotions this is a very
important aspect of our life because as
we all know emotions are present with us
from the moment we are born until the
moment we die so much like having a body
we need to learn how to work with our
emotions in order to have the best
quality of life we all know that we are
supposed to pay attention to our
emotions but at the same time we are
often told that we shouldn't take all of
our emotions seriously nor should we
react to all of our emotions with
behaviors and indeed that is true what's
been lacking however and what Dr Mark
bracket finally delivers to us is a road
map to think about our emotions in a
very structured way and thereby to
engage with our emotions sometimes shift
our emotions and certainly to understand
the emotional expressions of others in
ways that best serve our quality of life
so today's discussion centers very
heavily on scientific data that plays
out in the real world that we can all
use we talk about conflict resolution we
talk about how to think about and work
with emotions we talk about bullying
both in children and in adults how to
deal with that sort of thing effectively
and we talk about emotional intelligence
which it turns out can be increased at
any stage of life so by the end of
today's discussion you will be armed
with a tremendous amount of new
knowledge and many new tools many new
protocols that you can immediately apply
in your life in order to improve your
relationship to yourself and to others
before we begin I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is separate from my
teaching and research roles at Stanford
it is however part of my desire and
effort to bring zero cost to Consumer
information about science and science
related tools to the general public in
keeping with that theme I'd like to
thank the sponsors of today's podcast
our first sponsor is better help
betterhelp offers Professional Therapy
with a licensed therapist carried out
entirely online I've been doing weekly
therapy for well over 30 years I
consider doing regular therapy just as
important as getting regular exercise
now there are essentially three things
that great therapy provides first of all
it provides good rapport with somebody
that you can trust and talk to about the
issues that are most critical to you
second of all it can provide support in
the form of emotional support or
directed guidance and third expert
therapy should provide insights insights
that are useful in allowing you not just
to feel better in your emotional life
and your relationship life but of course
to be better to be better in terms of
the relationship to yourself your
professional life and to others and of
course to things like your career goals
with better help they make it very easy
for you to find an expert therapist with
whom you have these critical components
of therapy also because better help
allows for therapy to be done entirely
online it's very time efficient and easy
to fit into your busy schedule with no
commuting to a therapist office or
looking for parking or sitting in a
waiting room if you'd like to try better
help go to betterhelp.com huberman to
get 10% off your first month again
that's betterhelp.com
today's episode is also brought To Us by
eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart
mattress covers with cooling Heating and
sleep tracking capacity now I've spoken
many times before in this podcast about
the critical need for us to get adequate
amounts of quality sleep each night one
of the best ways to ensure a great
night's sleep is to control the
temperature of your sleeping environment
and that's because in order to fall and
stay deeply asleep your body temperature
actually has to drop by about 1 to 3°
and in order to wake up feeling
refreshed and energized your body
temperature actually has to increase by
about 1 to 3° eight sleep makes it
incredibly easy to control the
temperature of your sleeping environment
by allowing you to program the
temperature of your mattress cover at
the beginning middle and end of the
night I've been sleeping on an eight-
Sleep mattress cover for well over 3
years now and it has completely
transformed my sleep for the better
eight sleep recently launched their
newest generation pod cover the Pod 4
ultra the Pod 4 ultra has improved
cooling and heating capacity higher
Fidelity sleep tracking technology and
it also has SN snoring detection that
remarkably will automatically lift your
head a few degrees to improve your airf
flow and stop your snoring if you'd like
to try an eight sleep mattress cover you
can go to 8sleep.com
huberman to save $350 off their pod 4
ultra eightsleep currently ships to the
USA Canada UK select countries in the EU
and Australia again that's 8sleep.com
huberman I'm excited to share that I'll
be speaking at a health Summit called
udonia taking place in West Palm Beach
Florida this November 1st 2024 through
the 3rd of November 2024 udonia is an
inperson event that offers science back
tools live fitness classes and a range
of treatments and protocols to optimize
your physical and your mental health
I'll be giving a keynote talk with none
other than Dr Gabrielle Lion on Saturday
as some of you may know she's a former
guest on the hubman Lab podcast and has
a terrific podcast of her own that's
going to be on November 2nd and we will
discuss all things neuroscience and
neuroplasticity we'll talk about some of
the benefits and protocols related to
cognition and mood and much more also
presenting at udonia are other excellent
scientists and clinicians who've
appeared on the hubman Lab podcast
including Dr Sarah gotfried Dr Zachary
Knight and Dr Robin cart Harris along
with nearly 70 other experts to see the
full lineup of speakers and topics and
to register visit
udonia spelled eud m
n.net it's sure to be a terrific
Gathering and I hope to see you there
and now for my discussion with Dr Mark
Brackett Dr Mark bracket welcome thank
you great to be here I'm excited to talk
to you today about many things related
to emotions we hear the word emotions
and we have all sorts of ideas about
what they are what they aren't we also
hear about emotional intelligence quite
a lot these days and I have a feeling
that the way it's discussed is often not
the way it really is so to just kick
things off could you clarify for me for
everyone what is emotional intelligence
what does it pertain to and then maybe
we can use that as a way to drill into
the deeper question of what are emotions
sure I think you know at the simplest
level it's how we reason with and about
our emotions and feelings that's like
the simple definition the way I talk
about it is as a set of skills and we
use the acronym ruler to describe those
skills the first is recognizing emotions
so I'm trying to read your facial
expression right now right are you
interested or are you bored already I'm
trying to understand emotions where are
they coming from like why am I feeling
this way what's the consequence of that
feeling the third is labeling emotions
so being precise with the words that we
use to describe our feelings the fourth
is expressing emotions knowing how and
when to express emotions with different
people across context and culture and
then the big one is the final R which is
regulating emotions what are the
strategies we use to help us deal with
everyday emotions so if I were to take
an emotional intelligence test would it
have me looking at pictures of facial
expressions would it have me reading
paragraphs about emotional exchanges and
gauging who felt what and why and how um
that sort of thing if you were to take a
test from like 20 years ago yes we try
to be a little bit more Innovative now
in our measurement of the skills so for
example I just finished with a bunch of
colleagues publishing a test of emotion
perception but it's not static images
it's uh video clips um that are around
three to 4 seconds that show subtle
emotions uh it's about vocal tone it's
about body language and we're trying to
get people to
um accurately kind of label these
emotions in bases body and voice when I
think about most uses of the words
emotional
intelligence it seems to correlate again
in a very non-scientific way seems to
correlate with one's ability to tolerate
others emotions and make sense of the
emotions of others for instance I've
heard it said before not about me that
so and so has high emotional
intelligence because in the presence of
their child or someone else's kid
reacting in a certain way they were able
to see ah they just feel blank and
therefore they are screaming as opposed
to
defaulting to a um you know a broad
binning of what they were observing and
saying oh my goodness that kid is a brat
for
instance you're describing emotional
intelligence as a self-perception as
well yes um and so is our task therefore
to do the equivalent of what in my
little anecdote this other person was
doing to be able to parse one's own
emotions in a fine enough way to
understand the experience and kind of a
third person way that one can regulate
their behavior what they say how they
act um how much is recognition of others
emotions and understanding of those as
opposed to one's recognition and
understanding of their own emotions
factoring into this thing that we call
emotional intelligence so the whole set
of skills are intra and interpersonal
that's really important it's about self
and others
always for example right now we are
co-regulating each other's emotions
right our facial expressions our vocal
tones we're influencing how we each
other how we feel
um when you think about the recognition
piece we'll just start there right
there's self-awareness like Mark how you
feeling right now and I'm you know I'm
having mixed emotions right this is a
great podcast I want to be articulate
you know I'm excited but I'm a little
you know overwhelmed because I got so
much I want to share but I don't know
how much I'm going to share so there's
like all that awareness of my emotion
sometimes I have language for it
sometimes I don't like any of us and
that's why it starts off with kind of
just a general awareness like am I
Pleasant am I unpleasant do I have a lot
of energy or do I feel
depleted and we call that you know your
core affect and then I could start
asking myself questions like well what
are you doing right now Mark well I'm
sitting across from Andrew being
interviewed okay well how does that what
comes up for you with that and then I
try to label that feeling so that's like
the r the U and the L of emotional
intelligence for the self and I'm doing
the same thing for you I'm looking at
your facial expressions your body
language I'm listening to you I'm trying
to understand if I say something do you
shift and I'm trying to put language to
it so it's self and other so given that
we're both scientists interested in
emotions you're the expert uh I'm also
just the student today um I think it's
worth pointing out to people that there
isn't one location in the brain that
governs this complex process that you
just described it's a network-wide
phenomenon but you did mention the body
you you mentioned feeling you know how
is one feeling both in brain and body to
what extent does somebody who has high
emotional intelligence have more or less
body awareness or somatic awareness as
opposed to somebody who's quote unquote
in their head put differently can
somebody who's very much in their head
who has very poor body awareness have
High emotional
intelligence well I think another big
deal about emotional intelligence is
that we like to think of it as or people
think of it as
this
construct I don't think that's the best
way to look at it I think it's much more
interesting to look at it as a set of
discret skills that come together
they're not that highly correlated and
so you know it's I really like to think
of them as emotion skills and that
within the r the U the L the E and the r
that I described there are subskills and
so part of what you're talking about is
the body awareness some people are more
cognitive you know they're just very
language oriented some people you know a
lot of therapists somatic you know
talking about somat sensory things all
good I think at the end though you know
this is why I teach this stuff is that
we have to know how we
feel we got to know what we want to do
with those feelings and we have to know
how the people we live with and love and
work with and teach how they feel too
and so we need language in the
end some years ago I went to this course
it was you know broadly could be
described as personal development it was
interesting it was grounded in science
and psychology and each day would start
with going around the circle as
typically is done at these things and
you'd have to say how you feel but you
couldn't use evaluation you couldn't say
good or bad or so so and I found it it
very difficult uh found it difficult for
a number of reasons first of all I don't
think I was ever trained to use specific
language for my feelings in fact I don't
think I was ever trained to understand
what feelings were in fact I know
neuroscientists and psychologists are
still trying to figure out what feelings
and emotions really are so um a couple
of questions when it comes to using
language to describe our
emotions how important do you feel it is
to have
a broad Buffet of options you know a
previous guest on this podcast Lisa
Feldman Barrett and I talked about this
a bit and she mentioned that in some
cultures there's very specific language
for specific emotions in fact there's
even a word to describe the feeling of
sadness one has in a particular culture
after getting a really bad haircut yeahh
which is incredible when one thinks
about it we all know what that feels
like right we know what it feels like
right but there isn't to my knowledge
a word for that in the English language
I mean I'm sure there's a curse word for
it in the English language but U not
necessarily for that specific feeling um
or unique to that specific feeling so
what is the relationship between
language labels and emotion and I ask
that as a way to kind of wedge into the
ruler approach right because as you
pointed out that one recognizes
understands labels and then but the
label is Central literally to the uh
ruler approach it is
yeah so I like I'm very similar to Lisa
in terms of there are emotion Concepts
or categories well let's use the anger
category if you only have one word for
anger that means all you know is there's
one form of anger but if you start
teaching people well there are other
words that we could use like peeved
irritated angry enraged livid and you
have Rich conversations which is what I
do in schools with kids and teachers
themselves like what is when you're
feeling peeved like what what are the
things that make you feel peeved versus
the things that make you feel enraged
what does it feel like in your body when
you're feeling that way granted that
everybody feels things differently in
their bodies that really doesn't matter
what matters is that we have a Common
Language and a common understanding of
what these emotions are because
otherwise we can't communicate you know
I I'm really like this is a big deal for
me in terms of uh having a Common
Language within a community to talk
about emotion because you right now
right we're in a crisis of
anxiety I'm not 100% bought into that I
think that people use the word anxiety
um
improperly um anxiety is about
uncertainty about the future if we're
going to Define it it's different than
stress you know there's different forms
of stress as you know but the distress
right is usually when you have too many
demands and not enough resources which
is different than when you're
overwhelmed right which is my emotion of
the year which is I'm just saturated
like you know what's I can't even figure
out what's going on anymore which is
also different from fear and that's we
call that emotion differentiation or
granularity people call it they're
they're slightly different the
differentiation is like between emotions
and the granularity might be within the
emotion but from my
work um just to go on about this for a
moment the best example I have is I do a
lot of corporate training and so I'm in
a room filled with lawyers or Executives
and I'm ask them how they're feeling
nobody's really sure how they're feeling
like you were saying and then I'll do
these little kind of quizzes with them
tell me the difference you got three
minutes in a group anxiety stress
pressure fear overwhelmed and they come
back and the the number one response is
they're all the same and I'm like really
take another few minutes like try to
like just try to Define them they can't
even Define them they say things like
you know one is internal one is external
one is you know one is higher energy and
lower energy I'm like I I get that but
how do you what what do these concept
mean to you what do they mean to you
anyhow um finally we get to like the
definitions and then I say you know who
cares like why am I asking you to like
understand these differences go back to
your groups and talk about it and then
after like this is like a 45 minute like
you I thought this is going to be like a
two-minute activity it turns into like a
45 minute to an hour exercise because
they finally realize oh yeah so if I'm
anxious because I'm worrying about the
future you know maybe the breathing
exercise is not going to be as
helpful um because maybe I need a
cognitive strategy to say you know Mark
stop worrying about the stock market
Mark stop worrying about that the
University closed down because of the
pandemic you got no control over the
University's decisions and so helping
people make connections between the
feeling and the reason for the
feeling from my perspective has been
very helpful to help them learn how to
regulate the emotion so connecting the
feeling and the reason for the feeling
correct as opposed to just labeling the
feel yeah you need to know why it's why
the why that you really have to deal
with how do you feel about emojis from
everything you're saying they seem like
more than um benign to me yeah I mean I
I could um imagine that the emogif of
culture as I refer to it I don't think
that's a real word all right it is now
um set up a Wikipedia page tomorrow
emojify um is a serious problem because
it's what we call in science uh too much
lumping in science you have lumpers and
Splitters yeah right and
um both can have fabulous careers but if
you lump too much or split too much you
create more confusion and you often
create problems and I just see emojis as
lumping this incredible um set of
different continuums within us that we
call emotions exactly into Lally a small
icon and I can imagine this would lead
to all sorts of problems not just in
communication but in understanding our
own emotions put differently do you
think that the use of emojis has
degraded our level of emotional
intelligence and processing I mean I
haven't done the research but from my
perspective it's not helpful because the
goal is to get granular you know um
think about the difference and I'm not
going to quiz you right now but anger
and disappointment do you know that 95%
of the people that I ask to define those
two things cannot do it yeah I mean
right right off the cuff I'll just say
you know I'm familiar with both of those
feelings I know they're different sense
their difference I mean but the
disappointment piece um yeah could be
directed outward or inward I'm I'd have
to work systematically through until I
found a violation of one or the other so
where an example apply to one and not
the other and it it would take me a few
minutes longer longer than I want this
audience to have to wait there you go so
we should I got
enough but you have a growth mindset so
you're okay there you go yeah but the
you know so
disappointment unmet
expectations everything was legit it
just didn't work out anger perceived
Injustice and that's a really important
distinction because if you're a parent
or someone at work and someone is like
yelling at screaming firstly we grossly
you know make mistakes in terms of
labeling emotion from Behavior we got to
just throw that out there's no
correlation really between behavior and
emotion I can stop my feet you know as a
boy because I'm feeling sad just because
it's more culturally acceptable for me
to stomp than to cry and so why are you
so angry
maybe I'm feeling shame which is my
experience you know I was yelling and
screaming as a kid because I was being
bullied so much and then my mother would
be like you know who do you think you
are talking to me that way and then my
father would say go to your room and i'
be like is anybody reading my you know
emotions properly or asking me how I'm
feeling because you would know that I'm
acting out because of fear and shame
never happened because a variety of
reasons of you know triggering my
parents and they didn't have such high
emotional intelligence they love me just
didn't have emotional intelligence and
so going back to the anger
disappointment one unmet expectations
versus perceived
Injustice and so when you think about it
in terms of the strategy like for
example um my other career just you know
was as a martial arts teacher so I have
a fifth degree black belt in a Korean
martial art called hopo so if this
podcast doesn't go so
well um anyhow the um you know I was a
awkward kid had a you know very insecure
low self-esteem I got into the martial
arts I thought I'm going to get my
yellow belt and I'm going to feel tough
and proud failed my freaking yellow BT
test I mean at 13 years old you couldn't
imagine like there's nothing worse for a
13-year-old kid who's feeling shame and
being bullied to fail a yellow bell test
so what do I do I go home I hate karate
I'm never going back to karate
everybody's in an uproar I'm getting
yelled at I'm paying for karate you're
going back to you know whatever and the
truth was like let's think about that
for a minute so I go to take the
test and I've got to do my blocks and my
kicks you know my punches I know there's
five kicks there's five
punches and let's
say I do them the best I can but the
Sensei just says you know Mark just not
good enough you know you're not ready
yet that's legitimate disappointment I
expected to pass I didn't pass I'm
feeling disappointed so the strategy for
that is what like tutor help show me
what I have to do better on the other
hand let's say which was true for me
that some of the kids who were the
bullies in my middle school also took
karate and let's imagine they're
watching me take my test and they're
giving me some dirty looks because
they're going to you know threaten me
and which did happen you know you know
getting changed Going you know wait you
see what it's going to be like for you
tomorrow on the way to school now how am
I feeling terrorized fearful and I found
my test because of that so you can see
how I could show up with a particular
behavior um people are attributing
emotion to me they're labeling my
emotions for me because they don't have
the skill to deactivate as a parent or a
teacher or partner to be present to help
me understand my experience and then
label my experience understand where
it's coming from and then strategize
accordingly I'd like to take a quick
break and acknowledge our sponsor ag1
ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink
that also includes prebiotics and
adaptogens ag1 is designed to cover all
of your foundational nutritional needs
and it tastes great now I've been
drinking ag1 since 2012 and I started
doing that at a time when my budget for
supplements was really Limited in fact I
only had enough money back then to
purchase One supplement and I'm so glad
that I made that supplement ag1 the
reason for that is even though I strive
to eat most of my foods from Whole Foods
and minimally processed foods it's very
difficult for me to get enough fruits
vegetables vitamins and minerals
micronutrients and adaptogens from food
alone and I need to do that in order to
ensure that I have enough energy
throughout the day I sleep well at night
and keep my immune system strong but
when I take ag1 daily I find that all
aspects of my health my physical health
my mental health and my performance both
COG cognitive and physical are better I
know that because I've had lapses when I
didn't take ag1 and I certainly felt the
difference I also notice and this makes
perfect sense given the relationship
between the gut microbiome and the brain
that when I regularly take ag1 which for
me means a serving in the morning or
midm morning and again later in the
afternoon or evening that I have more
mental Clarity and more mental energy if
you'd like to try ag1 you can go to
drink a1.com huberman to claim a special
offer right now they're giving away five
free travel packs and a year Supply of
vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com
huberman to claim that special offer you
said that disappointment is when one
does everything essentially correctly
meaning gave the as much effort as they
could Etc and it didn't work out correct
versus anger which is perceived
Injustice yeah would you say that your
response to not getting your yellow belt
then because as a fifth degree black
belt now clearly you got that yellow
belt eventually I want to hear that part
of the story too um that you were
experiencing anger in this case could we
even call it inapo inappropriate anger
simply inappropriate because what you
really needed to understand was this
notion of disappointment but no one had
taught it to you I think what you're
getting at though is this like not
knowing how you're feeling because I was
never taught language right and having
an experience that is you know could be
many feelings at once which is could be
dis appointment could be anger it could
be
embarrassment um but you got to unpack
the situation you know what was the real
event that happened what really happened
in that moment and so if it were
legitimate like legitimate test and I
just you know I blocked the punch and I
just didn't have the strength to block
it you know like to really stand
firm it's disappointment it's like it's
son you know like you thought you know
your blocks were strong unfortunately
you need need some work let's practice
every day after school together we're
going to get these blocks down so you
can get that yellow but test there's no
other reason if it's because the bullies
are staring at me and I'm not capable of
dealing with the those piercing eyes
that are at me and I'm feeling so
anxious and overwhelmed and I just can't
block because I'm just freaked out
that's a whole another story do you see
how like a parent or a
teacher would um have to really
differentiate their support
but you have to really get at the
experience which means we have to have
relationships that are trustworthy
loving caring with all people because
otherwise we don't build that connection
to really understand how people feeling
we just take the kind of behavior like
why are you behaving that way you know
go to your room or you know just
practice it's like no like I've been
bullied at school and now the bully is
threatening me like that's serious stuff
that needs to be taken care of
yeah online um emojis and you know
downward facing thumbs versus upward
facing thumbs and this kind of thing and
you know uh vomit uh emojis and things
like that a mind blown that I'm starting
to realize that um these may be doing
far more harm than we realize um in yeah
I think it's fun you know maybe it's
just if you want to just use it for fun
not a problem if we're going to use it
to really communicate not so great I'm
thinking of instances where people are
just using these um with the intention
of expressing their like dislike of
something yeah but that the people on
the receiving end um experience a lot of
um kind of uh self self-criticism as a
consequence mostly kids but adults too
mean I know some adults that really
can't handle somebody commenting on
their Instagram post like big L or
something like that devastating for
people nope or this kind of thing it's
also interesting because I see it even
in the academic Community especially on
Twitter X yeah where I know that um sure
people reject each other's papers
critique each other's papers but they do
that with a degree of um intellectual
Nuance that um transmits a sense of care
right if scientists really care then
they're going to do a careful review um
as much as we would all love the this is
a perfect paper that's it um no critique
when somebody critiques something that
we do with um with an attention to
detail provided it's fair we we feel
cared for totally they care for the work
and we care for the work and so there's
there's a relationship there even if
it's an anonymous review but I'm shocked
to see how um scientific colleagues I've
known for decades um really how they
comport themselves online like it's
they'll swear they'll come out you know
um they won't bother to punctuate things
they'll they'll just sort of behave in a
in a very um what seems to be a very
activated way not all of them of course
but it's been very interesting the the
words that come to mind are I feel like
online especially on social media the
kids are acting like adults and the
adults are acting like children and so
there seems to be a kind of regression
toward what I'm calling the emojify or
the kind of high amplitude expression
with um with blunt tools and I don't
know what that is because I know these
people the reason I'm using the academic
Community as an example by the way it's
cost some of these people their jobs um
chairs of departments not at Stanford or
Yale fortunately um but um it's kind of
striking to me the way that um when we
remove the face-to-face connection when
um people will uh behave that way and I
use the uh parallel example of anonymous
review because there it's Anonymous So
in theory they could behave however they
want but there's an etiquette so it
seems like online etiquette is very
deprived of many of the important
features that were starting to you were
starting to lay out for us
here animin you know causes challenges
it's funny cuz I gave a speech
at Twitter now known as X about 5 years
ago and um and had analyzed quite a lot
of data you know it was actually uh the
year that Mariah Carey sang and it got
messed up and I just it was like the
week before I was going in January it
was like New Year's Eve and I just was
curious and because it really was a mess
up and I said what how are people going
to respond and it was 99.99%
ripping this amazing Diva to shreds so
she I I don't recall this incident so
she's obviously phenomenally talented
but she made him an error there was
something the she made an error there
was something oh goodness you know and
she just basically like the mic wasn't
working the way she wanted it to work
and she's like I'm out of here just like
I'm not singing and you should have seen
how people just I mean millions and
millions and millions of of comments you
know like and I'm not going to repeat
what people say because it was really
disgusting and I got really curious like
like what about things like gosh you've
like won 15 Grammy Awards like this must
really sting for you maybe one post like
that and so it does make you wonder
about a the type of person who is
interested in commenting like we may
have a bias there I do I do think we
have a bias there you know people who
you know they feel protected by you know
something if it's you know a more famous
person in politics obviously people are
very clear how they feel politicians
sort of open themselves up to it yeah
they do public facing people in general
I've heard um open themselves up to it
but um politicians in particular I think
we give we sort of give the general
public a pass to say almost anything
about them but it's it's not pretty it's
not pretty and it's not emotionally
intelligent to go back to the concept
right it's like what's your goal here
like I always ask people that like like
what are you getting at of being nasty I
perceive it as evacuative I I look at
that and I think gosh what they must
feel inside to be able to say those
things can't be good but maybe it feels
good to them I don't know I don't know I
don't I don't think I've ever made a
negative comment if I have um someone
can call me out on it hopefully it it
was in sarcasm with a friend yeah as the
target um and they were okay with it or
happy with it but I don't know what
internal emotional or psychological
state it would take to go say something
cruel to somebody online in my earlier
research um with Facebook we we analyze
millions and millions of posts and you
know people can be intentionally mean
and hurtful just people want to rip
people to shreds and they want to
instill fear
um and you know it's very hard to
disentangle that too just to be honest
so like what we found in our research
was that I could say few like you're
Andrew's wearing a black shirt you'll
see that I could say like nice shirt and
it might mean nice shirt or it might
mean I'm making fun of your shirt and
it's just hard like that's that's the
problem you know with with social media
in terms of post we don't really know
because the person who's receiving it
has a story right that was one challenge
we found around like getting posts taken
down was that it was hard to have that
objective Criterion of what was you know
painful to a person
which is why what we tried to do was
help the person who was receiving the
content communicate in a way with the
person who posted the content to get
them to take it down and what we found
was that it actually worked really well
if you taught a teenager for example to
say Hey you know hey Andrew like that
comment you made really was hurtful
would you please take it down we were
more likely to get people to take it
down and what we found in experimental
research was that if we just let people
go you know on their own devices um it
tended to be more retaliatory like who
the ACT do you think you are you know
you want to fight back you know and that
did not motivate the person to take it
down so even meeting gross Behavior with
compassion can be helpful can we provide
a counter example for the anger versus
disappointment that's on the positive
veillance sure side um what's a positive
set of feel feelings that people often
conflate like happiness and
contentment yeah that's a tough one for
I'm I'm getting FS all around you know
good thing I became a biologist ecstatic
and
elated yeah okay yeah this is you know
this is why I do what I do yeah I'm good
at this yeah yes you are you know when
you think about happiness you know it's
usually about you know when you're
achieving something right you're going
to I'm going to be happy happy when um
you know this will bring me happiness
contentment is the opposite contentment
is everything is just great as it is I
Feel Complete I have enough and part of
my argument against the happiness
research is that we don't spend enough
time helping people strive for
contentment and we push people to strive
for happiness which there's research to
show you know backfires you know if
you're waking up every day saying what
am I going to do to be happy what am I
going to do to be happy chances are you
know it's not going to work out a lot
and that kind of backfires to create
more despair yeah sorry to interrupt but
I as soon as you describe contentment
that way and thank you for parsing those
two very useful um to me um as soon as
you describe contentment that way I
imagine waking up and rather than
thinking about what needs to be done and
the things I want to achieve which I
want to achieve they bring me joy yeah
throw in a third word there just to
confuse myself
um this notion of contentment the way
that you described I could see might
lead me to pay attention to how good it
feels to have gotten some sleep to um
you know I sleep well most nights but
what what a u privilege that is um and
to you know maybe feel the comfort of
the the comforter and and the mattress
for a moment before barging into the day
yeah to chase happiness as it were
exactly I think you know the idea that
we have to be happy all the time is also
ridiculous I mean I'm an neurotic Prof
Professor like I'm never happy I you
know you know it's just it's tough and
so and also like I don't know about you
but given that my dispositional affect
another term uh you know is more on the
lower energy kind of contented with a
little anxiety um when I'm around the
people who are like high energy and
pleasant all the time I have a difficult
time you know it's like because you
somehow feel like you're not living up
to some standard I just feel like
overwhelmed and smothered by it you know
it's like stop being so happy all the
time here's where I get to appropriately
make a joke about because before we
started we were talking about East Coast
Schools versus West Coast Schools I was
like maybe you come West for and um and
that'll change or or maybe you're right
where you belong there at the also
phenomenal University that is Yale but
anyway that's kind of inside ball stuff
East Coast University is amazing Midwest
University is amazing West Coast
University is amazing different
perceived temper
but um and styles just look at the
walking speeds for instance not just the
weather but yeah you rais a very
important point we have a member of our
podcast team that is like always in a
great mood he's always in a great mood
and it is for me a reminder to be in a
better mood I'm not somebody that I
would say gets I'm not moody I don't
change moods quickly but I wouldn't say
that my disposition is to be like Tigger
like and just happy all the time um but
his energy around that doesn't drain me
it's um it but it makes me wish I was
him that's and that's okay that's you
you know what I mean like the part of I
mean part of being emotionally
intelligent with colleagues you know
romantic partners with children whoever
is picking up on that like now that I
know that about you it makes me think
differently about you in terms of what
your needs are that's emotional
intelligence and for me I am like wake
up every morning like having an exential
crisis and like what am I doing with my
life and you know what am I doing this
today for and then I got to publish this
paper I got to finish my book I got to
run my team like what do I want to do
and you know then I'm doing it and then
I'm like when I'm doing one thing I
think I should be doing the other thing
that's is just who I am and it's I've
tried everything and it's just that's my
operating system I'm more aware like I
like when I was I'm I'm working on
another book and uh as I was working on
it you know I'm in a chapter and all I
can think about to the next chapter and
I started like Mark give yourself
permission to be with this freaking
chapter it's okay like you can focus on
one thing and not worry about the future
and I had to literally kind of do that
for myself that's that's how I am you
know and so knowing that about myself is
useful because um it helps me find the
strategies that work for me and going
back to the happiness thing it's because
I'm also
introverted and so when I'm around
extroverts a lot I'm drained you know I
just like after something like this this
an intense conversation I'm not going to
go to a sports bar you know like have a
beer and like watch the game I would
never do that anyway but anyway that's
just not my thing you know like that
would make me I would like my brain
would be burnt like my dream would be to
leave here go take a hot yoga class and
take a walk have a glass of wine Maybe
by myself or with a friend and then end
of the
day all those things are readily
available
l a m of here we can point you in the
right direction it sounds lovely the um
the introversion extroversion bit is
going to um prick up people's ears it
certainly did mine um I like time alone
I also like time alone in the presence
of many people in fact I get my best
work done always either alone in
nature or in Manhattan where there are
people around me but I'm complet
completely isolated love that too so um
how should we think about introversion
and extroversion these things get thrown
around so much in popular culture are
there some solid scientific studies that
support that introversion can best be
defined as blank and extroversion as
blank and I'm guessing there's a range
there it's got to be on a Continuum it
can't be two bins I mean for some people
it's very clear you know they are a
clear traded introvert and for some
people they're just like endlessly
extroverted no matter they wake up
wanting to be with people they the end
of the day they want to go out with
people more and so what research shows
for example with creative people is they
tend to be both they tend to be high
introverts and high extroverts which is
interesting right they're introverts
when they're doing their art and then
their extroverts when they're out there
selling their art which is hard for some
artists right because a lot of artists
are kind of introspective and their
creative types but they really struggle
with getting out there and being that
extroverted like look at my art
and so you're the you're the lucky
artist if you are traded in both
directions um I think the easiest way to
think about it is just this it's a
proclivity right it's a proclivity to um
how you want to use your
energy and um the introvert is more a
container you know want to contain their
energy um they want to um you know be in
small groups they want kind of
less frenetic environments and the
extrovert just has a proclivity for you
know more sensation seeking you know
larger social groups and again it's a
preference I always say I'm an introvert
with pretty good social skills like I
can appear to be extroverted and most
people think I'm outgoing and I always
tell like I don't even like people that
much you seem very outgoing yeah I'm not
you know it's just not it's not my my
natural like if I'm at a party I
struggle with
like like what what am I going to do
here when you say you don't necessarily
like people that much I realize you're
joking but um and I was just going to um
make sure to ask because I can't presume
that doesn't mean that you dislike
people it's just that being in the
presence of a lot of people doesn't draw
you um out to want to be closer to or
get to know all these people simply
because they're there whereas an
extrovert seems to really like forming
and um engaging in new new relationships
old relationships all relationships
relating exactly if you're like running
a campaign to run for you know mayor of
your town like you're going to you want
to hire an extroverted PR person right
an extroverted person do marketing
because they're like going to be out
there like banging on the door it's not
very comfortable talking to people right
the introvert is going to be better at
doing the accounting you know and doing
the planning and we've done this
research actually if even fun with my
students I would have them take their um
take measures of that are valid measures
of introversion and extroversion I would
score them into groups like get the
really extroverted group and the Really
introverted group and I'd have them plan
a party just go plan a party and the
group of extroverts is bonfires there's
beer there loud music on the beach and
the introverts are like we have to make
sure we have good
napkins we want to you know we're going
to have four people you know it's going
to be quiet music that's just you know
how we're built interesting when I think
of throwing a great party and I've
thrown a few what I like to think we're
great parties it involves inviting a
bunch of people people over and then
being able to stand back from a lot of
it and not have to participate in all of
it I just like seeing friends that
didn't know each other start to interact
that's cool that's fun for me and then
um if I have to communicate directly
with too many people at the party I
would definitely feel drained i' I'm
known to retreat to a room and take a
nap
ored yeah I think so uh Rick Ruben who's
world uh renowned for his uh creative
insights and uh and
creativity and for being Rick um I think
once said on a podcast perhaps or maybe
he said this to me um that Tom Petty was
the sort of person that basically didn't
do anything besides write music and read
books and interact with a small number
of people in his inner circle and the
idea of leaving the house was just
completely overwhelming to him now of
course people were always approaching
him but like really really extreme
introvert whereas Rick has described and
I won't name names here um other famous
people musicians and otherwise that go
out specifically to try and get the
attention of Fame yeah and if they don't
they feel absolutely isolated makes
sense even though they have people in
their private life it's sort of like it
becomes a kind of extroversion
requirement I would imagine life is much
harder for the extrovert in the long run
because you there's shows the extrovert
tend to do you know have a little bit
more success um because they're more
willing to get out there and ask for it
you know they get higher they get raises
more quickly I see and you know in my
work in schools you know I always ask
teachers to pay attention to the
personality of their students because
the introvert has a lot of great ideas
they just not dying to raise their hand
and get the attention so don't just call
on the kids who are raising their hands
because you're missing out on getting
some great
information in that case um do you cold
call on people whenever I'm teaching I I
somewhat reluctant to cold call on
people because it I I recall it can be
terrifying when suddenly you're sitting
there taking notes trying to you know
organize your thoughts around what the
material and then suddenly you know the
whole room is looking at you it's a I
mean I set expectations you know around
that and I because I'm really particular
about that because you know it drives me
crazy when the you know the talkative
extrovert is always you know getting
their thing said um I think there's ways
there there's good instructional
practice IES that can help with that one
thing I'm thinking about though is this
intersection of personality and
emotional intelligence you just kind of
brought that up for me which is and
people confuse those a lot so for
example I even confused it when I was
younger before I studied it because I'm
high also in neuroticism meaning I am
more
Mercurial in terms of I worry about
things and I'm fine then I worry again I
just that's who I am and I just always
assumed that someone who is high in
neuroticism or you know more as I said
kind of volatile emotionally that was
this low emotional intelligence because
like how could you be emotionally
intelligent if you're emotionally
volatile and then I did all this
research and found there's pretty much
no correlation between personality
traits and emotional intelligence and
why is that well think about it if you
are someone who is more even
keeled maybe you don't even have that
much of an opportunity to regulate your
emotions right but then if you get like
triggered you you've never had
experience so you it's actually harder
for you someone like me I'm practicing
it all the time right I'm always like
I'm in a bad mood I got to give a
meeting I'm like irritable I got to give
a presentation so I'm like constantly
like figuring out how to deal with my
emotions and um and that's why there
it's they're separate
Concepts and in addition to it just to
build on this knowing your personality
traits can be extraordinar helpful for
choosing the best strategies to regulate
your emotions why is that I was
traveling in Australia recently and I
gave this speech to a group of people
the person who was the person in charge
of the speech uh it was about an hour
from Melbourne and um I took the train
because I preferred to stay in the city
took the train out I was planning to
take I had bought my train ticket back
the convenor said you know Mark I just
really would love to be with you and can
we just you know can I drive you back to
hotel and I'm thinking to myself like
that is the worst thing you could ever
ask me then on the wrong side of the
road yeah and I had my train ticket I
really it was a full day of
presentations and stuff I really wanted
to be by myself to decompress but I felt
bad and I said
sure the guy talked to me for the en an
hour like he just
nonstop talk to me I got back to my
hotel I was like I am going to have a
nervous breakdown like I need another
day to recover because and it just it
annoyed me about myself not practicing
you know what I teach which was Mark
know thyself you're drained be polite
you know it was my insecurity of just
saying you know I really appreciate you
wanting to drive me back but you know I
really have a lot to do tomorrow I need
to rest my voice I need to you know do
some prep instead I just sat there like
you know shaking and like you know
having like just went crazy so do you
see what I'm getting at like really
knowing yourself in terms of like what
drives you and what your you know your
personality traits just introversion
extroversion alone and how that relates
to like your selection of strategies is
so important super important and by the
way my joke about driving on the wrong
side of the road I do realize that we
drive on the wrong side of the road for
Australians and those in the UK so um
I'll do the for
you I'd like to take a brief break to
thank one of our sponsors element
element is an electrolyte drink that has
everything you need and nothing you
don't that means the electrolytes sodium
magnesium and potassium in the correct
ratios but no sugar now I and others on
the podcast have talked a lot about the
critical importance of hydration for
proper brain and bodily function
research shows that even a slight degree
of dehydration can really diminish
cognitive and physical performance it's
also important that you get adequate
electrolytes in order for your body body
and brain to function at their best the
electrolytes sodium magnesium and
potassium are critical for the
functioning of all the cells in your
body especially your neurons or nerve
cells to make sure that I'm getting
proper amounts of hydration and
electrolytes I dissolve one packet of
element in about 16 to 32 ounces of
water when I wake up in the morning and
I drink that basically first thing in
the morning I also drink element
dissolved in water during any kind of
physical exercise I'm doing especially
on hot days if I'm sweating a lot and
losing water and electrolytes if you'd
like to try element you can go to drink
element.com /h huberman spelled drink LM
nt.com huberman to claim a free element
sample pack with the purchase of any
element drink mix again that's drink
element.com huberman to claim a free
sample
pack text messaging is an interesting
example of communication that nowadays
um depending on how many people have
access to your phone number um can
either feel like a wonderful source of
filling the gaps you know on trains and
while in trans it and while walking to
the car perhaps hopefully not while
driving although people seem to do that
um and yet for the introvert I can
imagine that it might feel inundating it
might feel kind of um
overwhelming um how do you feel about
text messages because it's just yet
another form of communication I asked
this for a very particular reason um I
could imagine that extroverts love to
text message they love to receive and
send text messages that they can't stand
a moment of down time before boarding a
plane they're um they're excited that
there's yet another form of
communication at all hours of the day
and night whereas introverts would be
less excited to text message I also
asked this in part um because I want to
protect the um variable latency to
respond to text option that uh I've
tried to exercise in my life but that
seems to um doesn't really seem to work
I think most people assume um you know
if I walk up to you and I say hello and
you wait 10 minutes to say hello back
I'm I'll first think you're a little bit
rude and then think you're a little
strange whereas if I text you hello and
I don't hear back right away um I might
think you're busy there's some you know
there's some wiggle room for
interpretation but I think what I'm
really getting at here is do we tend to
project the same um latency expectation
on texts that we ourselves uh Embrace um
this seems like an important source of
um potential miscommunication
misunderstanding and maybe worse yeah I
mean certainly you could imagine also
though that the introvert might be more
comfortable texting because it it's less
stimulation so it could work I think it
could work in both
directions um I think the problem with
text messaging is that it's decreasing
emotional
intelligence because you really can't
communicate the same way through a text
message thank you can you repeat both
those things I'm to say 100 times no
because I I I mean I feel this wash of
like relief and now I'm looking for the
appropriate word because I'm talking to
you so I feel like I have to use the
exact appropriate word I feel um I feel
emancipated there you go um
because I also feel that as texting has
become more routine and has crossed a
number of different lines of formality
and in and informality right not just
with family members but with um
co-workers and that people we do and
don't know and just matter and have
known for ages you know the the um
jargon that we use with one group is
different than the jargon we use with
another um but I feel that texting in
general has really degraded our ability
to communicate verbally and in writing
elsewhere there's good research on even
like teens right now prefer to text them
to be face to face which is weird not
helpful to building like good
relationship I shouldn't forgive me I I
I'm going to interrupt you too I I I
have no idea what it's like to be a
teenager in 2024 so I I caught myself I
have no place saying weird because there
were things that I was doing as a
teenager that I'm sure adults were like
that's weird so I take that back you
think about how disconnected and
alienated and lonely people feel these
days that's not necessarily going to
help make things better I have an
example you know when my father passed
away a number of years ago I can't I got
all these text messages I'm so sorry for
your loss I'm so sorry for your loss I'm
so from people who I thought were really
good friends of mine like 20 30 year
friends I'm like you're not going to
pick up the phone and like listen to my
voice and ask me like what can I do to
support you right now and as it's so
strange and actually uh one of my
closest friends you know didn't even
text me she texted my
assistant and said please go into Mark's
office and tell him that I love him I'm
like this is really weird like we need
to like I picked up the phone I'm like
what is happening right now what is
happening right now and you know people
have preconceived notions maybe she
thought I was overwhelmed and devastated
and needed space but at the same time
like make a phone call leave me a voice
message and give me you know some
options I had one friend she's like Mark
I know you're going through a lot right
now I just want you to know like if you
want to talk anytime you want to call me
call me if you want to text text if you
want me to come out and stay with you
for a couple days I'm there that's an
awesome friend yeah that was like that
was exactly what I needed to hear I
wanted you know someone to offer provide
options or just do um but we're we're so
hesitant these days it's kind
of scary to me and it makes me fearful
about the future of our relationships in
general yeah I think this is such an
important topic um I think
because texting is so common and has
been used to um you know communicate so
many different forms of human emotion in
this broad bin format I mean how much
can you really put into a text I I have
some friends and Co put and you can
voice text which is like then it's like
right right it's long and sometimes well
there are issues with that too I feel
like it's it's enriched compared to
texting unless the text is carefully um
written out punct Ed I mean we can see
the care that people put into certain
texts or emails that they TP and most
people including myself don't right
texting is a short form communication um
audio notes um voice memos seem like a
step up I think what this has probably
done is that it's made the phone call or
the goodness the handwritten card or
letter it's kind of rais that to the the
the Pinnicle of care of expression
completely and by the way text messaging
you know it's fine I always you know
I'll be a little while you know like can
you please pick this up whatever great
nothing wrong with text messaging but
when it
replaces intimacy you when it replaces
building you know strong bonds that's
where I see the the largest problem yeah
I didn't outright set this rule in my
relationships but I would say with my
co-workers family members and in other
kinds of relationships there's a rule
which is that we don't argue over text
yeah it's not cool but people do it a
lot
it's easier because you don't have to
feel the
feelings that's that's what it is you
know it's I can be psychologically
distant from that person and say what I
want to say where if I have to say it
face to face I'm going to have to face a
response and that response may be very
uncomfortable for me and I probably
don't have the strategies to deal with
it because I never learned them I mean
you and I are both aware that there is
neural real estate specifically
dedicated to the processing of faces and
specifically to the processing of human
faces and specifically to the processing
of the emotions carried in human facial
expressions so you know this is a
hardwired aspect to our species which is
diminishing you know there was a good a
study done about kids in camps and they
randomly assigned them to be with their
phones not with their phones and showed
that after a couple of weeks of Camp
kids who um have their phones decreased
in their emotion perception skills so
it makes a difference you know we need
to give children and adults more face to
FaceTime wild could we talk about the
energy pleasantness axes sure um and
create a mental picture for people of
what this is I found this to be
incredibly useful um if uh listeners or
viewers have a a pen or pencil and paper
you could uh map this out but it's very
easy to um imagine in your mind so maybe
you could just tell us on the vertical
axis yeah so we have you know horizontal
we'll call that
pleasantness and this is going back to
something else that we talked about
earlier it's called pleasantness not
goodness or Badness it's in this moment
am I feeling highly Pleasant or am I
feeling unpleasant do I feel like
approaching my
day my colleagues do I feel like
avoiding my colleagues do I feel safe
and comfortable do I feel uncomfortable
that's the xais and the way I like to
think about it is that from the moment
we wake up in the morning till the time
we go to bed that is activated we just
you know you wake up in the morning and
you just you're all of a sudden have a
thought process like yes I want to get
out of bed no I want to pull the covers
over my head on the Y AIS is energy or
activation okay so vertical axis is
energy the technical term is arousal or
activation but I think energy is a
better term and so it's either your
highly energized or you're deactivated
or low in energy that's mental energy
it's physical energy it's like kind of
like how much fuel you have and then we
cross those two axes to create what we
call in our work the mood meter and
there are four quadrants we got high
pleasant high energy yellow so think
about emotions there happy excited
elated ecstatic
optimistic we got the green so that's
low energy and pleasant still that's the
calm content tranquil peaceful relaxed
quadrant and then we have the unpleasant
side and I'm going to repeat myself it's
not the bad emotions or the negative
emotions we're going to call them
unpleasant because it's not generally
Pleasant to be sad or down or
disappointed or hopeless or feeling
despair which is the blue or that low
energy unpleasant and we got our red
quadrant on the mood meter which we'll
call the high energy highly unpleasant
emotions which are feelings of anger and
anxiety
so it's it's very helpful for people
because you know when you're like you
even said this yourself like you're not
really sure how you're feeling and we
know our inner lives are complex so to
be able to have a tool that has four
quadrants where you like I don't know am
I Pleasant I'm guess I'm kind of
pleasant but my energy low all right I'm
in the green all right now what are my
options there no I'm feeling quite
energized and pleasant oh what are my
options there Etc
we find that in for both preschoolers
and
CEOs very helpful extraordin helpful and
then you know going back to ruler for a
minute we might talk about the quadrant
as being the r for self-awareness right
recognizing like where am I in Emotion
space and then you might ask yourself
like all right well what what what's
going on you know what's why am I
thinking that I'm in the yellow or red
or blue or green what just happened what
might be happening oh I'm about to be on
a podcast oh I'm about to take a test oh
I'm about to go into a difficult meeting
with a colleague oh I'm about to go home
and my partner is going to be
mad okay now I understand why I'm
feeling the way I'm feeling I put a word
to it I'm more precise I'm not enraged
I'm irritable I'm not Blissful I'm just
content I'm not depressed I'm just
feeling down I'm not overwhelmed I'm
just feeling
a little
uneasy that's helpful because that helps
you go into the E and the r of ruler
which is all right is this an emotion I
need to express or do I keep it to
myself does this emotion need need help
do I need support right now or am I okay
with what I'm feeling I have a great
story about this actually you know we're
born to be fixers I think you know
especially in my role like as a teacher
or if you're a parent you know with a
kid or a teacher partner right and so I
go to visit this school where my program
is it's called ruler also and we're in
about 5,000 schools now across the
United States and I'm visiting the
school
kindergarten and I do this check-in and
the little boy says he's in the blue
which means unpleasant low in energy and
of course my like little 5-year-old he's
in the blue I feel terrible and then I
fixer like I want to fix this kid I want
to I don't want this kid to be in the
blue and so I I know I can't do that
because it's part of the it's like the
rules a ruler you don't fix people
feelings you don't fix people's feelings
so I um I just said to the boy um I'm
just curious you know you need a
strategy and he goes no and I'm like no
I said I'm just curious you know why
don't you need a strategy he goes
because I know it's
impermanent wow maybe the next
Generations coming up are far more
emotionally intelligent than hours if I
may if they are if they get direct
instruction that's my vision for the
world is that every everyone gets an
emotion
education um and the boy says no you
know I know it's going to go away I'm
fine I'm like okay I'm bad at this kid
like you're my teacher you know it was
amazing and to think that that
5-year-old had that Insight that he had
an unpleasant feeling that didn't need
to be fixed that it was okay that he
just knew he was in a little funkin but
he has already experienced that emotions
are ephemeral you know and he can just
let it go and he'll be in the green a
little later or the red or whatever else
it was really kind of mind-blowing I was
going to ask how do we resolve the
contradiction between the message to
feel our feelings versus to just
recognize that the feelings are moving
through us as this five year-old gosh uh
was and is able to
do because I feel like it gets to the
heart of a lot of what we hear in the
psychological and wellness space which
is you know feelings are just feelings
they're transient they represent all
sorts of things and we can get to the
biological underpinnings or the the um
you know childhood trauma root root
cause underpinnings the all sorts of
things genetics for that matter should
we feel our feelings in order to best
recognize them I would imagine yes um is
there any value to suppressing our
feelings or does that tend to just grow
the feeling what is known about this
from the research literature because you
see a lot of different opinions about
this but I I'd like to know um have
there been any experiments where people
are placed into a negative or positive
emotion or are experiencing a negative
or positive emotion and then
intentionally try to suppress it has
there been any brain Imaging any
measurement of of galvanic skin response
like does the emotion grow or does the
emotion shrink it tends to grow um there
are cultural differences just to be
frank but in you know Western culture um
suppression tends not to have great
outcomes uh finding ways to reappraise
tends to be more helpful this really
gets into though for me the core of my
work because you know for 20 years of my
life I was running a center for
emotional intelligence and teaching
skills and I would go around and I would
see a lot of resistance a lot of
resistance whether it was you know the
hedge fund manager or the superintendent
of schools or a parent you know I've had
fathers come up to me say things like
you know Mark you're so vulnerable like
you shared your whole story about being
like I would never in my wildest dream
ever share with my own son that I was
bullied as a
kid and I'm like tell me more of course
you know I'm a psychologist and in the
end you know what you know the guy was
afraid that his son would think he was
weak and so we have a mindset about
feelings that we have to talk about
people have feelings about their
feelings sometimes we call those meta
emotions or meta feelings sometimes it's
just
that happy is good anger is bad it's
that simple my whole uh Recent research
has focused on something I call
permission to
feel you know you know a little bit
about my own story I had a pretty rough
childhood that included abuse it
included a lot of
bullying and I had two parents who love
me but um you know my mother was a very
anxious woman who never had strategies
so you know she was always saying I'm
having a nervous breakdown and she'd
lock herself in her room and she
wouldn't come out for a few few hours my
father was as we might call today you
know uh the tough guy who was kind of
toxically masculine son you got tough
and up he even said to me once you know
he's gone now and we have a good we had
a good relationship but I'll never
forget he said you know son I used to be
kids up like you he said that he
did and he didn't I mean he thought that
was a message that I needed to hear to
toughen up right that was he was doing
that through love I mean it was not
emotionally intelligent parenting but
that's was the way he thought and you
know he did love me he just didn't how
to be a parent in that way um and so
think about that bullied shame fear
abused all kinds of stuff going on in my
head mom having nervous breakdowns
father toughen up what happens you
suppress you deny you ignore you eat you
do all kinds of weird behaviors because
you have nowhere to go with with your
feelings and I fear that way too many
people feel that way right now and I
have good research to show that um you
know you've read my book you know I had
an uncle Marvin he was a middle school
teacher who you know by some wave of a
magic wand was staying with my family
one summer when I was 12 and he noticed
something in my facial expression my
body language he knew something was off
and he was the first adult who sat with
me and said hey Mark
how are you
feeling and I don't know if it was his
facial expression his body language his
vocal tone but that was the opener for
me I'm not doing so well I don't really
like life very much I'm scared and he
didn't say I'm going to have a nervous
breakdown or toughen up he said we're
going to get through this I got you I'm
with
you and it's really interesting to me
because you know I feel like we're so
focused on skill building which is
really important but I want to take a
step back and say are we giving
ourselves are we giving our colleagues
our partners our children the permission
to feel and I feel like a lot of people
don't have that permission now my
research shows with tens of thousands of
people across cultures that only about a
third of adults felt that they had
someone when they were young who created
the conditions for them to have
permission to feel I mean 70% of the
people walking around here right now in
our corporations in our schools in our
homes
30% felt like they had that and then you
wonder what do you think the
characteristics are of these people the
characteristics of the uncle Marvins or
Aunt maras or the colleague at work by
the way this also works in the adult
Workforce you can have an
emotion uh Mentor or a feelings coach at
work there's three characteristics do
you want to take a
guess um I'm guessing empathically
attuned okay um all of that's a for
those that know empathy is a is a
involves a bunch of subcategories so I
won't acknowledge that empathically
attuned um I'm guessing that they have
themselves some high high emotional
intelligence um and the third is um gosh
I My Hope Is that there be a a uh High
situational awareness yeah right because
your uncle needed to see something
subtle in your facial expression or
maybe not so subtle but everyone else
was missing it but but um to be able to
detect that there was something that
really need it was like a silent Cry for
Help yeah you're getting at like you're
really Nuance which is that's why you're
a scientist too the three broad
characteristics the first one that show
shows up cross-culturally
non-judgmental like when we think about
the people who gave us permission to
feel they just had no judgment they let
me be who I can be or who I am the
second is empathic and kind of coupled
with compassionate which is kind of the
different form of empathy the third
primarily is active
listening people want to be around
people who don't judge them who listen
actively and show that they care
it's that simple and I'll tell you it's
really um interesting to me because you
know I do a lot of public speaking and
often my my new strategy is I do surveys
where I'm going to be presenting so I
can present the audience themselves with
their data and so I'm giving this speech
to a bunch of adult parents High School
parents and I'm showing the data from
them they filled out the
survey non-judgmental active listening
empathy
compassion and and and I show just like
my national study a third of you said
yes two-thirds of you said no so this
this this mom and she's like just like
impulsively jumps out of his seat she's
like I'm having an epiphany I'm like
okay and she's like I know I'm certain
that my daughter has an uncle Marvin I I
know it and I'm also certain that my son
doesn't and you know something Mark I am
leaving your presentation today and I am
finding my son his uncle Marvin
I'm like lady it could be you uh and it
was interesting it's kind of going right
by her it's like Outsourcing right like
there's your karate teacher there's your
feelings
mentor and it's interesting to me and I
push on this in my research now what is
the resistance like what are people so
afraid of I mean they're so afraid of
feelings their own and their childr or
their
partners and so I asked you know I push
on this and what's really interesting
and sad to me is that adults today the
two barriers I'm going to now I'm going
to push you again what do you think the
two things that get in the way of giving
other people permission to
feel this is actually where my next
question was going so I'll just ask the
question in the form of an answer is
this like Jeopardy I guess that's what
you do or no it's the other way around
in Jeopardy sorry you can see how many
episodes of Jeopardy I've watched
um that that if people don't
have adequate bound emotional boundaries
and they are maybe even too empathically
attuned that someone they care about
experiencing anger or sadness or
frustration maybe even with them would
shift their own emotions um and not make
them able to be available with the three
qualities that you listed off before in
particular non-judgment because now it's
personal mhm and so it would undermine
the process you're you're right there um
the first one though is just a really
interesting one just time people I don't
have the time you don't have the time to
be non-judgmental like can you talk to
me about that one please it's actually
the case that we don't have the time to
be judgmental it's far too energetically
costly yeah I
agree um the second really goes back to
the skills so I've had parents say
things like I'm afraid to ask my child
how they're feeling cuz I'm not going to
be able to handle
it I mean think about that for a minute
I'm not going to be able to handle it so
you'd rather your son or daughter
suppress their fears or their whatever
they're feeling because you haven't
developed the skills that you need to
help co-regulate and support them you
know this is again going back to you
know my Mission Vision you know is that
we need a world where everyone gets an
emotion education preschool to high
school and it's got to continue in
college and it's got to continue in the
workforce and it's got to continue in
our as we grow older because as a 54y
old person right now who leads a large
group of people Co hits like I had a
complete meltdown I don't know how to
like lead during Co I was trying to
figure it out doing Zoom meetings and
you know crazy stuff and then my
mother-in-law got stuck with me and that
was a real kind of wakeup call in terms
of like relationship building um and was
really rough for me actually she came
for a wedding uh one of my colleagues
got married on March 3rd of
2020 well my mother-in-law is from
Panama and so just so you know all
flights to Panama got cancelled by March
13th and they didn't open until
September so we had this 81-year-old
lovely lovely woman but like you know
it's a lot for your mother-in-law to
live with you for eight months one
little quick Side Story for this I just
I think it's it's relevant so like it
was getting really you know I'm working
from home my mother-in-law was there she
wants me to make her cappuccino every
morning which I like to do for the first
week But like after the fourth month
like learn how to use the machine and I
don't want to do it myself I'm afraid of
the machine I'm like sorry I'm not I I
didn't mean to laugh out loud that's all
right those cappuccino machines can be
scary they can be but like growth
mindset right like watch me I'll help
you do it no I want you to make the
coffee I'm like you got to make your own
coffee you got like I I told you I don't
like people in the morning you got to
make your own coffee anyhow one night
we're at dinner and uh she looks at me
in Sp she speaks Spanish I speak Spanish
and so she said you know in Spanish are
you really the director of the center
for emotional
intelligence and I looked at I'm like
not tonight not tonight like it's we're
going down and it was a mess oh I'm
sorry I didn't mean to laugh I laughed
before you said it was a mess I just
your uh impression of the question it's
a maybe a Drew to mind some experiences
of yeah I mean and there it was like yes
my day job is I run a center for
emotional intelligence but like I'm a
human being who had strong emotions and
I didn't have the strategies and I
needed to cultivate a whole new set of
Regulation strategies to deal with that
new aspect of my life in thinking about
people that can really help us by asking
us the right questions or in thinking
about how we can ask people the right
questions to really help them and US
gain an understanding of what they're
experiencing I recalling numerous
instances in my life where there seemed
to be the requirement for uh an excuse
like an activity excuse like uh I
currently have a very good relationship
with my father but I remember when there
was a time where we had to talk about
science or watches as an entry point to
any conversation let alone about
emotions right and uh he's done a lot of
work I've done a lot of work and I like
to think we're much we are much further
down the road we enjoy a a very close
relationship as a consequence of that
work in part but I think what you're
describing really makes me realize
that no matter who anybody is or what
their age or what their background that
as human beings we don't just need
permission but we really should think
about just having a conversation about
how others feel 100% as opposed to
making an activity a prerequisite for
that conversation and as I say this I
realize some people are probably
thinking oh boy okay so we're just going
to sit around and talk about our
feelings but my short response to that
is yes because when you don't do that
then I can say from experience then
pretty soon you're not participating in
those activities with that person and
potentially with anybody you know I mean
I'm not saying that people become so
unpleasant to themselves and others that
they don't have any friends I mean okay
that's an extreme case but
what I hear in the backdrop of
everything you're saying is that it's
not just about an education it's really
about a practice of giving ourselves and
others permission to Simply have a
conversation about what one is feeling
as an exercise for both people to be
able to explore that in the correct way
and there is a correct way and You'
described the ruler approach as one
there strategies you know correctness is
a tricky term you know it's a it's a
game it's no matter what it's going to
be a game because you can't predict how
people will respond but I couldn't agree
with you more um I'll give you another
example my father who like you we ended
up having an excellent
relationship um my mom died um when I
was young and he remarried and uh he had
moved to Upstate New York and he had
this lovely wife and she called me about
two years after they were married and
she's like Mark I can't take it anymore
your father is driving me out of your
out of my mind I'm like what do you mean
he's angry all the time he's just really
making me miserable and she's like I
think you know I might have to leave him
and I'm thinking to myself oh my
goodness like you know he's older and if
she leaves him he's going to want to
move in with me so like road trip and so
I went on a road trip took my father out
to the local coffee shop we're sitting
down I can't take it anymore this is
what he's telling me I can't take it
anymore I'm like Dad like tell me more I
can't take it anymore I'm like that's
not enough information dad like what
can't you take anymore in the end what I
learned was that my father has three
sons all of us have doctorates we're all
independent we're all successful her
children were having struggles and she
was needing to babysit her
grandchildren my father didn't like that
my sons are all taking care of
themselves you know I want you know he's
not realizing this but what he's saying
is I don't like the idea of you spending
so much time with with these grandkids
cuz I want your
attention now why do I tell you that cuz
after my father and I spoke for about a
half hour about this I said dad you know
it sounds like you're
jealous he's like what do you mean I'm
jealous I said well you're upset that
Jane your wife wants to spend more time
with the grandkids and that's not time
with you in my emotion lexicon I didn't
use that term you know that's jealousy I
can't believe you're telling me I'm
jealous I'm like I'm not I'm not telling
you're jealous you're telling me you're
jealous I'm just giving you the the
concept starts crying hysterical crying
because he had awareness for the first
time of his emotional experience he was
so emotionally illiterate he just didn't
know what he was feeling and he was just
acting out once he sat down and
understood the the experience of like
wife wants to be with child because they
need support I'm not happy with that cuz
I don't know what to do with myself when
she's spending time with the
grandkids it's
jealousy all of a sudden we had a
pathway to helping him regulate now I'll
finish this story by saying about two
months later Jane she calls me she's
like Mark I don't know what you did at
that coffee shop but like your father's
a changed
man and you know I don't take all the
credit take some credit
but it just shows you the power of
emotional self-awareness like once you
really know how you're feeling it can be
liberating and then you can figure out
what you need to do with those feelings
I'm letting that really sink in because
you know I think these days we hear a
lot about
therapy fortunately in my opinion um I
think and I'm going to get the numbers
only crudely right but they're certainly
in the right direction and
amplitude there was a survey done I
believe at Stamford um asking students
how willing uh they would be to seek
therapy if they were dealing with an
emotionally trying time and this was in
the I think early and mid 90s and the
numbers that came back were very low
somewhere in the teens or 20% of
students pulled um whereas nowadays it's
in excess of 80 or 90% very high yeah
and I think that's representative of L
can I give you another example this so
here I am a professor at Yale I'm
teaching courses on emotional
intelligence now I should just let you
know there's resistance often times and
my students are fantastic in general but
there's a resist resistance to wanting
to learn about emotional intelligence
what they want to do in general is get
an A in my course but they don't and
they want to memorize like oh so the
theory was written in 1990 by mayor and
salv this a Premed course no this just
general that was a joke PRS love the
preds but they they they're very great
conscious I have stories about that too
but
um and so I say no this is this is about
you developing the skills like this is
going to be you're going to think really
critically about and part of the essays
you're going to write are going to be
your action plans for building your own
emotional intelligence I don't want to
do that I want to you know get the test
and take you know get the a after a
month I get them bought
in um interestingly though in my because
I make my courses into research and um I
ask them to fill out surveys how they're
feeling every class number one emotion
stressed everybody's stressed I'm
thinking to myself like stressed out
like you got a good life here here but
nevertheless stressed you know I have to
have empathy I get it but I decided that
I really had a hard time remember I
defined stress as having too many
demands and not enough
resources I didn't feel like that was
the actual feeling now who am I a judge
but one way to get better at it was to
have my students do journaling when
you're stressed write about it what's on
your mind what are you thinking about
take a guess with the number one emotion
was after we did the qualitative
analysis of journaling about stress yeah
what they were really feeling fear
okay
Envy oh interesting Envy envy your
father is richer than my father your
mother is more connected than my mother
you've got better hips you've got better
lips it was endless social
comparisons right and so Envy right is
wanting what someone else has and
anxiety is about uncertainty stress is
about too many demands not enough
resources and so here I was you know um
having deeper knowledge of what was the
underlying feeling or emotion that they
were having which was Envy not stress
and so I had a conversation with the
counseling department and I made a joke
about it and I was like you know what's
our University's Envy Reduction
Program you know it wasn't you know the
most popular you know
conversation and I just think it's
interesting to think about it in terms
of helping people to learn what to do
with their emotions you know right now
you know there's a mindfulness craze
everyone's doing mindfulness and I do
mindfulness and I appreciate mindfulness
but let me tell you you know when you're
feeling chronic Envy you know doing
breathing exercises is not going to
decrease the Envy you're going to have
to work on your Construction in your
mind of your relationships with people
and so I just feel so strongly that we
help people
pause a little bit reflect a little bit
think about how they're feeling as a
pathway to just having
wellbeing your joke about Envy reduction
um is something I take very seriously we
did a four episode series with Dr Paul
kti who's a uh World expert in psychi
he's a psychiatrist and and among the
very very best uh psychiatrists in the
world um by many accounts and he
discussed during that series but also on
other podcasts he's appeared in such as
my friend Lex Friedman's podcast that um
Envy is actually the at the root of much
of the evil in the world small scale
evil large scale evil yeah and a lot of
the despair that people feel and I think
it's a word that isn't discussed enough
um because like the sound of it is it's
kind of gross right envious Envy nobody
wants to be associated with it but
fortunately Dr kti described it as a you
know a natural human emotion in some
cases but I had no idea and I don't know
if he knows but um maybe he does through
his clinical work but I'll certainly
pass along what you just said to him
that so much of the stress that I have
to imagine um good people and these
students are after all I imagine people
they're not evil um very not
characterologically evil um let's hope
um are experiencing Envy the wish to
have more of what somebody else has
maybe something specific which of course
gets to these um more common phrases of
people feeling that they are not enough
yeah um which is going back to
contentment right I actually oh I didn't
draw the arrow now I now I I thought I
draw the arrow between contentment and
envy right so if one wants to combat
Envy you could imagine that a program to
combat Envy might be perceived if one
didn't understand it as a calling for
people to just be content with less
which is not what we want right I mean
we want ambitious people in the world we
want people aspiring we want people to
have growth mindset and yet you can we
don't want people to be stressed and
have a a pervasive feeling of Envy
inside either so how would you make
inroads into
Envy well I think again like all
emotions Envy is not a bad emotion you
know the way I think about emotions as
being you know and when we need to get
help with our emotions is when if it's
an unpleasant one it's intense in long
duration right momentary Envy you know I
get envious all the time I get Envy I
watch TED Talks I'm like ah that timing
was amazing you know and I'm like I'm G
to I'm going to try that out you know so
I I use that Envy of someone else's
skill you know as a way to grow how does
that differ sorry to turn your own work
back on on you with from admiration or
inspiration like wow they you know like
the yeah that's what I'm getting at so
that's the difference between you know
the the envy that leans toward
admiration versus the Envy like what
you're referring to that leads to
resentment right it's if I if I hate you
because you have you know what I want
now we're talking you know pathological
Envy potentially and so that's the
self-awareness piece you know it that's
the part of really getting you know that
differentiation of emotion that
granularity um because again it's like
anger it's not a bad emotion anger is
okay there there's reasons to be angry
in the world when we get treated
unfairly we should be angry doesn't mean
that we have to be disregulated right
there's an assumption that we make that
when we experience unpleasant strong
emotions like anxiety or anger you know
that we're going to be
disregulated I have a whole new
relationship with my anxiety
very different relationship I me I spent
years working on it I notice it and I'm
like hi anxiety how you doing today and
then it just it's okay I can even be
giving a you know here with you or
giving a speech or teaching have that
anxiety come in and not allow it to have
power over me because I can observe it I
can welcome it and then if it's in the
way I can say you know anxiety you're
going to go back there for a little
while or you know Mark I mean sometimes
you know when I give speeches like it's
it's the same speech right you redundant
and it's like I can't believe I have to
talk about this again and then I'll look
at the audience I'm like it's their
first time you know it's like all of a
sudden that like my despair turns into
optimism and
hope that's all
regulation conflict resolution is
something that I think a lot about in
any situation where emotions are
discussed and it brings me back to this
earlier situation you were talking about
where uh this woman said that she was
going to find uh her child somebody to
uh help him to intervene and you were
thinking well why not you his feelings
me she was going to go you know bu his
feelings Mentor right exactly um and now
there's a whole field of feelings
mentors cropping up that actually
wouldn't be such a bad thing hey that's
my another one of my goals so it
wouldn't be such a bad thing say it
louder I like that goal um so when we
were talking about that one of the
things that um surfaced was this notion
that some people have a natural empathic
Attunement or the emotion that the other
person is feeling is a negative one and
it's about us or about them and as a
consequence you know we're not able to
really be present to help the person the
way that you helped your dad like he was
he was frustrated with his wife yes had
he been frustrated with you it might be
a little bit little bit more challenging
to say hey well Dad maybe what you're
experiencing in terms of your
frustration with me is actually blank
yeah because you're now in a tether with
them so to what extent is empathic
Attunement um a positive trait are there
people who are better at turning it off
or directing it in appropriate ways um
than others in a previous podcast that I
did recently um somebody sitting right
there in that chair um uh told me and I
believe them that I am codependent it's
the first time anyone's ever called me
that codependent she defined it she
spelled it out and it and it in a very
monious way explained a huge array of
challenges that I've experienced to the
point where I've been learning more
about codependency all right okay not
easy for me to say now interdependent
interdependent yeah um certainly
depending on others is important but
certain certain patterns um fall well
under the umbrella of codependency so I
was like okay and even now I'm
uncomfortable talking about which is
part of the reason I'm trying to
desensitize myself to the word itself
let alone drill into the process of
getting through it so the point being
that if our emotions are so strongly
Tethered to others we see that as
empathy we label that typically as
positive but it really diminishes our
ability to be there for people if their
emotions are negative and about us I
disagree okay great great fantastic
because that's empathy without emotional
intelligence and so I I I work with a
lot of doctors I you know I've done
quite a bit of work with the cancer
hospital at Yale it's called Milo and
you know doctors have been taught from
early on you know you know like leave
your empathy at the door and I challenge
that you know when you're a patient with
cancer knowing that you may pass the
last thing you want is an unempathic
doctor right you want a relationship
with someone who's treating you and the
assumption is that you get lost in your
empathy and people have written about
that and it's true there is overzealous
empathy you can have compass and fatigue
but again it's in the absence of you
know emotional intelligence what do I
mean well part of emotional intelligence
is regulation and so if I see my work as
a cancer doctor as you know helping
people have the best last few months of
their
lives that's a really interesting way to
think about it you know so as I'm in
relationship with my patient my mindset
is I've I've come to the understanding
that my job you know people
pass but I could go down a rabbit hole
of Despair because everyone potentially
may pass or I can see this as I'm giving
someone a gift I'm giving them a gift of
my presence I'm giving them a gift of
them you know feeling held and cared for
and so to me it's all about the framing
you know of empathy um yes of course you
know if you're just You Can Lose
Yourself and someone else's shoes but
that's not emotional intelligence
emotional intelligence saying you know
what I'm noticing myself I'm getting
lost in your feelings I need to pull
back a little
bit do we know where in the brain um
empathy resides um we hear so much about
mirror neurons but I think for those of
us that have been in neuroscience and
psychology long enough we we acknowledge
yes there are appropriate conversations
that include the words mirror neurons
but that they've been made out to be
much more than perhaps they are in terms
of empathy and they've become sort of
the default description for uh all forms
of empathy and understanding and it's
not uh it's not just that so what do we
know about the the brain science of of
empathy I don't know much about that to
be honest what I know more about is the
kind of psychological experience of
empathy and that there are multiple
forms of it so for example there's the
cognitive empathy piece where I you know
I've never had your experience but
intellectually I get that you've
suffered or intellectually I get your
experience there's the emotional empathy
which is you know when I meet other
survivors of abuse who have felt shame I
understand what that means because I've
lived there and not that our experience
was the same but our feeling was the
same we have a shared emotional
experience and then on top of that that
compassionate kind of form of empathy is
what I think is what we need much more
of in our society which is we don't just
just cognitively understand where
someone is or relate to their experience
but we feel compelled to be in
relationship with that person and be
supportive I'm thinking about something
El that you spoke about earlier which is
this idea that like and this is a
misconstrual of my work and others work
that the goal of this is to talk about
feelings all day long like the last
thing I want to do is talk about my
feelings all day long like that is not
helpful actually and I've had some
experiences in my life you know where
like some like just to be blunt
happens you know and I call everybody I
know like my best friends my family can
you believe this happened I mean I can't
take it anymore and then I hang up the
phone and I did the same thing and they
all listen to me and
then I've spent two hours on the phone
telling the same thing over and over
again talking about my feelings
and I feel worse because I've rehearsed
it 15 times that's not emotional
intelligence right when we're
emotionally intelligent we recognize and
we know that just talking about it is
actually not helpful like we need to be
with someone who's that active listener
who's non-judgmental who shows
compassion but when you're compassionate
you actually are bringing it back to the
person saying you know is this you know
the right thing right now for you you
know what else might you think about you
know um I know when I've had really
difficult experiences you know the
person who says things
like maybe could you just jump in the
hot air balloon for a minute mark and
look down at your life and like besides
this one thing that you feel like is the
worst thing that's ever happened to you
in your whole life anything else going
right I mean yeah my partner loves me my
dogs love me unconditionally I got great
friends oh oh yeah all of a sudden that
little thing that's activating you is
not so big
anymore that's emotional intelligence
right is not getting lost in the empathy
not just endlessly talking about
feelings to the point where there's no
strategies and I think that that's a
that's really interesting um because it
goes back to something important which
is the permission to feel
characteristics of
non-judgment active listening um and
empathy compassion never and I'm talking
I have tens of thousands of people
who've done this does anyone say
fixer Problem Solver I don't even get
smart or wise when we think about the
people who create the conditions for us
to be our true selves we don't think
about the wisest smartest fixer Problem
Solver we think about the non-judgmental
listener who shows
compassion and I just I think that has
to be reinforced that some of the fear
that we have is that we're going to get
lost in all these feelings but no one's
asking you to get lost in their feelings
what they're asking for is support
they're asking you to just listen and to
maybe ask me a few questions to help me
clarify experience and then help me on a
path towards feeling
better yeah I keep hearing that the way
to do this properly is to ask questions
as opposed to telling people what they
need to do um your friend or this person
who was a an effective source of support
in that moment said you know can you can
you get in the hot air balloon and look
down on your life um I noticed that they
didn't say get in the hot air balloon
for a second and then do this uh as a
former partner of mine said who I'm
still on great terms with no one likes
to be shifted yeah no one wants to be
told what to do right no one wants to be
shifted no one no matter what state
they're in high or low wants somebody to
come along and try and shift them or
just tell them like you know go for a
walk okay well why am I you know like to
do what or meditate yeah that one's
become equally uh grading when it's
probably a great thing to do but perhaps
there's a a different way posed in the
form of a question that would be more
effective I think the hot air balloon
example also brings to mind something um
I'll try and keep this as succinct as
possible for your sake and for the
audience sake but um you know having
studied stress a bit in my laboratory
and experienced a lot of stress as most
people have in their lifetime it's very
clear that when we stress our mental
aperture our visual aperture our
auditory aperture everything shrinks
right it contracts and and we know that
getting a different spatial perspective
gives us a different temporal
perspective we can start thinking about
our life Bend IN larger pieces and get
that perspective of the things that um
in life that are going well um there's a
meditation that I guess it's a
meditation I don't know what to call it
that I um started doing years ago when I
was a junior Professor because life was
so
stressful before tenure and you little
did I know that it just continues to get
be stressful but a pleasure to do the
work um that involves basically doing a
standard type meditation for a few
breaths of closing my eyes and focusing
on my body and what's going on
internally but then opening my eyes and
focusing on something external like my
hand or the room and then going to the
pale blue dot sure um it's a very you
know wide aperture so effectively the
the hot air balloon looking down it's
distancing distancing right and making
this a practice not in a moment of
stress but each morning as I start the
day as a kind of reminder that our
brains our cognition and our emotions go
through tremendous State differentiation
like these complete we're kind of
different people under these different
space-time references um and that when
we're in stress we tend to get locked
yeah into one SpaceTime reference and
I'm not trying to be you know Cosmic
about this but you know that the the
nature of stress is to have us anchor to
the stressor correct and to put up
mental walls to break out of that
physical walls so um it sounds like
great supporters and we can help
ourselves through um the UN more
unpleasant portions of the emotion scale
if we want to by um taking ourselves in
into this different perspective using
spatial tools hot air balloon um pale
blue dot questions to yourself say
things like Mark I mean I travel a lot
and you know I was just in Washington
State for some presentations before this
flight delays then my flight got
cancelled I missed a dinner and I used
to get really worked up about it and I
would just then I just take a seat at
the airport take a nice long inhale I'm
like Mark is this really going to be
something that's going to bother you
next week I'm working on a book I'm like
I got another night in a hotel to work I
actually reframed it as an opportunity
to like have some space and right and so
you can use these techniques a lot going
back to my dad so my dad as he got older
his anger did come back and he was kind
of there were I remember this one you
know time where we're at a family dinner
and I had already been you know in my
position for a while and there was some
a little bit of resentment with my
father because you know he was
a a bluecollar worker and a very very
talented air conditioning repair man and
had a good career but all of a sudden
you went to graduate school and got PhD
and that was you know it was a little
bit difficult for my father at some time
and so when I got a job at Yale in
particular you know he got a little
there was some emotions about that and I
remember we were at this one dinner and
basically he I'm not going to repeat
what he said because it's really gross
but he said something like you know Mark
you think your blank doesn't stink
anymore and I was like yesh and then he
just kind of went on and on and on and I
had to make a choice like do I start
crying you know like in the middle of
this dinner because I feel so violated
by my father do I like tell him to go
blank himself and walk out of the room
and I decided to use a distancing
technique I decided to make him into a
movie I decided that he was now a TV
show and that TV show was something I
was observing and not feeling and that
has proven to be one of the most
powerful strategies for me is when I'm
in a position
with someone who has a lot of and
negative energy and as a kid who was
bullied I'm more affected by these
things I think I create that
psychological Distance by just putting
that picture frame up there and I just
observe it and I kind of ask myself
questions about it I'm like wow or I say
things like you know wow that's really
interesting I wonder where that I get
curious about it like I wonder where
that's coming from you know what was his
childhood like that he's so
angry and it really is helpful so these
are very powerful techniques
that can be used in real time as you
just Des very real time I use them all
the time you know I'm at the grocery
store you know I'm not going to get into
my issues but you know I have I'm like
and I grew up with you know I would say
lower middle class we were very we
didn't have a lot of money everything
was on a budget and you know I'm
fortunate to be in a different
circumstance now but I'm still cheap and
so my partner were I'm like I don't
understand like we're not buying that
like that is ridiculous like we're not
spending $7 on a bottle of organic
almond milk you're like I'm not doing it
we're not doing it and then I have to
like move away from the aisle take a
little walk I'm like Mark you know is
this worth your relationship the almond
milk like really is this what is this
what you're going to do and so like I
don't know maybe I'm just the only one
who needs regulation like 300 times a
day but I find that I you know different
strategies like the picture frame works
when I'm angry or someone is ang angry
with me um my anxiety I get into the hi
a balloon and I look down when I'm like
irritated with someone I just take the
walk away and I ask myself is this
really that important and that's what I
hope people will learn is that there's
so many amazing strategies out there and
that we use them interchangeably with
different emotions and different
contexts while a lot of the stereotypes
dating back to the you know let's just
say 1930s through to the end of the
1970s seem to um couch people as U more
stoic less emotionally expressive
especially in public or with people that
they weren't very close with there was
also a tendency at least in movies about
that time for people who were passionate
to be rewarded for expressions of their
passion so it's kind of two ends of the
of the spectrum right we always think of
the kind of the the real stoic um thing
both for for male and female phenotypes
right um You Look at M from the like the
the 30s and 40s you see that but you
also saw intense expression passionate
expression um and now I suppose we're in
a bit of a um new place where I think
there's an invitation I like to think
there's an invitation for a broader
range of emotional expressions and
phenotypes let's call them I'm a
biologist after all it's also a safe
word to use still I think you can use
the word phenotypes um stereotypes is a
bit loaded um a lot
loaded but emotionality and the notion
of people being overly emotional has a
unfortunately a bit of a a negative
hinge to it whereas somebody being
passionate that sounds like a pretty
good thing well emotional is like
historically like you're hysterical it
means that you are not in control of
your emotions I don't I I don't like to
use that term ever I just find it a
useless term and um because that's when
oftentimes when people think about
emotions they think of people being
emotional and I just don't even know
what that means it just it it has like
just connotations from the past that I
don't think are helpful maybe that's why
my graduate adviser said instead of
telling you to be careful um I'll tell
you to be mindful because the opposite
of mindful is Mindless and then you'll
remember yeah and also exactly and by
going back like you you'll hear people
say why you so emotional and again
that's a place of judgment what they're
saying is that you're experiencing a
strong emotion that's making me
uncomfortable I don't know what to do
with that feeling so by me labeling you
as emotional I can alienate
you where's that going to lead to not
good communication right not healthy
relationships and yet we reward people
still for being passionate even if it's
um tinged with some anger like if
somebody has a cause that they're really
passionate about we don't necessarily
say they're being emotional we say
they're really passionate
rooted kind TR of AIC outome whereas
just anger or sadness kind of just you
know um geysering out of us is it
doesn't seem like it's directed towards
an end right the emotional the emotional
is a
judgment right when I say you know
Andrew you're so emotional right it's
also can be a form of gaslighting right
which is I'm trying to get you to
believe something about yourself that I
want you to believe which may not be a
reality at all which is usually
problematic in our society um I think
most of our low self-esteem comes from
gaslighting in our childhoods where
people gaslighting each other yeah I
think that's the beginning of bullying
which is that you know Mark you're too
skinny Mark you're too overweight Mark
your nose is too big Mark your nose is
too small Mark you're too feminine Mark
you're too masculine and then all of a
sudden there's no um feelings mentors
there's no education and I just start
beli in it and then it becomes my
reality a self-fulfilling prophecy and
it's awful I mean you see it all the
time we're not born being self- critics
we're born being experience dependent
right we depend on
relationships and if those relationships
are meaning cruel and people are
gaslighters well guess what that's going
to end up being how we think about
ourselves in your book you include a
number of really wonderful quotes but
one one of them that I anchor to very
quickly is the following all learning
has an emotional base and it was none
other than Plato that said that what is
the relationship between emotions and
learning and decision
making let's think about right now right
our our interaction right as a teacher
right I mean how many of you have ever
been mean your listeners and you like
how many us have ever been in a
situation in a classroom where it's like
all right everybody let's turn to page
357 all right Mark you're going to read
paragraph one and Andrew you're going to
read paragraph two and your brain is
immediately
gone so emotions Drive our attention
it's so clear right if we're not feeling
engaged or curious we're going to be
bored and again boredom not a bad
emotion it just means like what's being
presented to me and the way it's being
presented is not me meeting my needs
it's not engaging me so my brain needs
to do something I'm just going to go
doodle I'm going to go push the kid here
I'm going to get on my phone it's just
where we want to our brains are wanting
to do things um when we're in
environments where there's a lot of
curiosity where there is high engagement
attention is much better so that's the
simplest thing to think about um in my
work you know my whole career has been
about building curriculum to help
Educators integrate emotions into their
everyday classroom and part of what we
help them understand going back to that
mood meter think about that for a
minute you know a lot of us because of
our dispositions we tend to speak with a
certain Cadence we tend to present in a
certain way and if you're someone who
like lives in the green right you're
just calm and content and tranquil and
peaceful B people all right some of the
yoga teachers right let's all turn our
attentions to ourselves they're great I
love yoga but my point is if you're
always in that green quadrant like for
me even though I'm like living there a
lot it's
like give me some energy please and then
there's like I have a friend who is a
principal of a middle school in San
Francisco and she's a former tennis
coach and she walks into the school team
let's go grow grow every day it's like
Heather come on you know like you're
overwhelming me and then you've got
people who might be in that kind of you
know blue quadrant you know it's like
we've done some education work in the
past you know and let's be real how much
education reform really matters you know
why you know Mark you do all this
research but who's reading it do anybody
really reading it such a downer yeah or
that person who's always in the red
right that's activated you know like
CTIC you know and so my point here is
that you know we're going to default in
many ways to being in one of these
quadrants maybe all day long maybe part
of the day but as someone who is leading
um like I because I I consider
leadership
teaching uh someone who's managing a
team as a teacher in a classroom as a
parent couple whatever I've got to be
aware of kind of where I live
emotionally and I've got to be aware
that not everybody wants to be with me
where I'm at and my job is to create an
emotional roller coaster ride for people
to bring people on an emotional Journey
because that's what's going to keep them
interested and believe it or not from
our research and others research we know
that certain emotions are better for
certain things so for example if I want
my high school students to be like
really brainstorming ideas I'm not going
to put on like a Gregorian chant you
know it's like I'm GNA put on you know
go back Lady Gaga you know I'm on the
edge of glory and like let's get pumped
up and like everybody let's get the
Post-its out there and everybody's
excited and just
brainstorming but then
you know which one are we like what's
going to be the project you can't be all
hyped up because then your brain is not
in a very kind of um a building
consensus kind of model mode so when we
bring our energy level down it's like oh
let me think about it for a minute it's
more you're more thoughtful you're more
careful you're more like I don't
know then like people would say well why
would blue why would you know unpleasant
low energy be helpful well believe it or
not often times we can be much more
detail oriented when we're in that low
energy unpleasant place it's like
writing a I do a lot of grant writing
right it's like I think it's great not a
great
idea Mark like put on the classical
music like Zone everybody out get into
that place where you are going to look
for every eye to dot every comma that
should be a semicolon every Dash that
should be this paragraph matching you
can't do that when you're really super
excited it just doesn't your brain
doesn't operate that way and then people
say red like why would red be great the
best story I have for that is so I
actually did a collaboration with Lady
Gaga uh and her foundation Born This Way
Foundation many years ago and um we did
a study of thousands of high school
students across America and we looked at
how do they feel when they're in school
and what we found was 77% of the
feelings and I repeat that 77% of their
emotions at school were unpleasant
tired bored and stress were the top
three back then so we did this study we
were working on it as a big project
called the emotion Revolution and we
ended up going to the White House to
present our findings I had to make a
decision like I had the Secretary of
Education at that time in front of me
I'm presenting this big study on the
emotional lives of teenagers do I want
to go in there like you know I've got an
amazing study to share with you I'm like
not so great do I want to go in there
like
secretary let's just take a nice long
inhale and an exhale that's not going to
go over so well do I want to go in in
the blue like you know it's pretty bad
out there no I decided that red was my
quadrant I wanted the people in the
education department to be fired up by
this research I want them to be I want
them to feel the passion that I had and
the anger that I had that it is an it is
an injustice for kids to feel that way
in our nation schools we need to figure
out what to do to create a more engaging
learning environment and so I decided to
really present that in that way I didn't
present the findings and like look at
the data I'm like I want you to really
take a look at these data please 77% of
the I mean I'm saying 77% of the
emotions tired bored and stressed how is
that going to lead to a nation filled
with people who are Innovative and
creative and making a difference in the
world think about it we know how
emotions Drive the way we behave if
you're tired bored and stressed all day
long what's the result and so I
presented that way and you know I did
the best I could um and I think that's
the magic of understanding
emotion does that does this resonate
that we're going to we're going to be
intentional about the emotions that we
feel and that the emotions that we
create in environments whether they're
at home or at school or in the workplace
because certain emotions work better
for certain things yeah your examples um
bring me back to your earlier Mention Of
This brilliant 5-year-old kid who
realized that um his current emotional
state was like the weather it's yeah
going to
change in order to have that perspective
my guess is that he had to have already
at some point moved from the blue
quadrant so low energy low pleasantness
um to the green quadrant you know high
pleasantness low energy to the yellow
quadrant perhaps not in this order and
yes I'm using this to remind people
about the quadrants uh higher energy
higher pleasantness um and then red um
high energy low pleasantness yes well
because he's checking in Daily right
right so in this school which we call a
ruler school that's what they do kids
check in in the morning and other times
throughout the day and they start to
recognize that I can feel this way at
one point of the day and I can feel this
way at another point of the day and if
I'm feeling this way and I'm about to do
something with that feeling is not great
I can shift out of that feeling or I can
still feel that feeling and still be a
good learner I mean that's incredible to
me that we can do that and I see it in
thousands of schools and it's done
remarkably well and you've developed an
app that's freely available um that
allows people to essentially um press
the screen um is that right and and to
denote where they are on this um energy
versus pleasantness um scale at numerous
times throughout the day and night if
they choose we'll provide a link to this
app in the show note caption it's called
how we feel yeah I've used it before and
a previous version I need to update and
get the new version and I will um I
found it to be immensely useful just to
start thinking about emotions along this
energy versus pleasantness axis yeah um
after one does this for a few days or
weeks you know maybe um checking in and
and touching the app um I don't know a
couple times a day maybe again in the
evening upon waking uh what sort of data
or information does one get back that um
can be informative toward being a
healthier happier person app excuse me a
healthier person more contented more
content um well what's really cool about
the app and the reason why we have an
app is that technology can be super
helpful in this instance for building
self-awareness
so if I set reminders which you can do
on the app to check in in the morning
maybe after lunch or right before I go
home you know you pick whatever works
for you or you can do it randomly and
then you aggregate your data across time
right now you have instances of your
emotions over time but what's also cool
about it is that you can disaggregate
your data by things like who you're with
or where you're at or what you're doing
and then you can analyze that so you get
your little mood meters that are all
different colors because wow I thought I
was more in the yellow at work but I'm
actually more in the blue at work or I
thought when I'm with this person I'm
actually feeling calm actually when I
look at my data I'm always anxious with
that person so it runs a reverse
correlation yes fantastic and then you
can just look at your report and then it
asks you questions to get more insights
and also importantly we've embedded a
lot of the strategies that I've been
talking about so like these distancing
strategies or the breathing exercises or
the mindfulness exercises or gratitude
exercises which by the way I was
thinking in the back of my head as we
were speaking about the Envy Reduction
Program I think the number one thing is
gratitude that like if our brains are
just endlessly searching for what's
better that's out there than what I have
we're not experiencing any gratitude for
what we have and so I spent a lot of
time helping people really understand
like take a look like look where you're
at as a student think about what you
have the opportunity to learn think
about the opportunities you have in life
and all of a sudden it's like oh yeah my
life is pretty good as opposed to
everyone else's life is better than mine
so gratitude for me sometimes it feels
cliche these days you know you've heard
so much about it and I can't talk
strongly enough about both the practice
and the science that supports it yeah
Amen to that when I did an episode about
gratitude um now some years ago um I was
positively shocked to see the data yeah
the the data on gratitude practices are
so striking in terms of whether or not
one looks at neurotransmitter expression
or U whether one looks at um happiness
rating scales as it were um learning
ability to learn so many things are
improved by even short gratitude
practices exactly and it was interesting
for me to realize that not only do
effective gratitude practices include
thinking about what one has but also in
observing others expressing their own
gratitude either towards us or towards
others so um you know there's something
about the human brain that that really
thrives on gratitude and the other thing
that I think is worth mentioning you
said um uh these students um could
through a gratitude practice realize the
opportunity that they have I think a lot
of people default to the assumption that
a gratitude practice will make them
complacent yeah and um stop seeking uh
to reach their goals but actually the
opposite is true there's a smaller
research as far as I understand maybe
it's expanded in recent years where if
people do a regular gratitude practice
even five minutes a day their
achievement actually increases as well
so gratitude and complacency are um not
on uh they're not in the same bin
exactly these are all evidence-based
strategies to help us have a better life
so clearly you're on a mission and it's
a wonderful in fact admirable one at
that to bring more emotional awareness
um can we call it that emotional
awareness to kids and to adults to
better the world I don't I don't think
I'm you know overreaching there I think
that's the goal I'd like to get back to
your origin story a bit to understand uh
a little bit more about the motivation
behind the goal um you've written about
in your book and you've spoken a little
bit uh today about the fact that you
were bullied pretty viciously yeah um
and also um we're the target of abuse
yeah and when one thinks about bullying
in particular um we I think all
hopefully naturally default to okay how
can we stop
bullies but I'm guessing this is a
two-sided issue and I'm not I'm not
trying to create empathy for bullies
here but I'm guessing that in order to
really um disintegrate The Bullying
problem down to zero which would be the
ultimate goal sounds great to me yeah
that um we need to get into the minds of
both the bullied and the bullies right
and as uncomfortable as that might be
maybe um this is an opportunity to uh
you know Embrace some of the very
practices that you've been talking about
yeah um so if you would could you tell
us a little bit about how as a kid how
you perceived your bullies I'm very
curious about that um I can say I've
never been bullied but I've also not
been a bully I I can easily say I was
thinking about this during our brief
break there um I hate bullies like I I
like hate them I'm I'm like right there
in the red low pleasantness like top top
corner there like it activates me
physically like it makes me angry makes
you want to do something about it but as
somebody who was bullied how did you
perceive your bullies did you think they
were like correct or the authority um
and how have you embraced whatever
understanding that was and morphed it
over time to be able to think about how
to solve The Bullying problem both from
the perspective of the bullied and
bully yeah that's going to we're going
to have a couple days together for this
um you know I think you know when I
think about my 8-year-old self
10-year-old self 11year old self being
bullied um remember bullying is about a
power imbalance that's one of the core
elements of it it's about the intent to
harm um which is a the the it's not
conflict it's not like sibling rivalry
it's intent to harm you know whe there's
a power and balance and you know how
long and and the repetition of it those
are the three key factors in bullying
it's repeated it's intended to harm and
is a power
imbalance and so that puts you in a
really powerless position when you think
about it when you have nobody to support
you no upstanders no one else around you
to to help you get out of the situation
what happens is that you feel fear um
and what I felt um and it's been the
emotion that I've struggled with my
whole life a shame because what happens
when you're bullied often is that you
are made to feel like you are not worthy
it's diminished selfworth because I've
got power over you I'm going to do
whatever the hell I want to you I'm
going to say whatever I want to say I'm
going to spit on you I'm going to throw
you into the locker I'm going to you
know do crazy stuff which is what
happened to me um and guess what there's
nothing you can do about it and when
you're in an environment where nobody
does anything about it it creates
despair so you can see how there's a lot
of emotions there and I'll tell you
right now one of my hardest memories of
being a student in around 10th I mean um
when I was around 10 years old is that
um I remember being in a classroom in
math and I was wearing like a vest like
a down vest as a protection it was like
my thing to hold on to like like my my
little vest was going to be protective
of me the only problem was I had two
bullies sitting on the side of me and
what they did throughout the entire
class was they used pen and they just
drew like wrote things about me on my
jacket and I can still remember like
you're sitting across from me you being
my
teacher and I can still remember locking
eyes with my teacher and him just
looking
away and that feeling that you have of
complete despair like how is it that I'm
not being protected you know by this
adult in my community
and so that's the issue that we're
trying to solve for now I could make all
kinds of excuses about the teacher maybe
maybe he didn't really notice I don't
buy it because it was repeated over time
and it was happening a
lot I could also say that you know maybe
he misread my facial expression I'm not
buying that either I think it was either
he had a mindset you know this is a
write a passage you're going to toughen
up kiddo or you're not going to survive
in your Clifton High School or another
point is that he just was like I have no
idea what to do about it and I'm just
going to let it go none of those are an
option for me anymore this is not
acceptable and so we need to teach
people skills people need to be
emotionally perceptive like emotions are
signals I mean that's an important point
of this
conversation my facial expression which
was probably one of depression fear and
shame which is not one of a big smile in
general obviously there's variability
but point is that it's pretty clear when
you're wearing a jacket and sitting like
this in your classroom with a hoodie on
you know doing your work and people are
writing on you you're not in a good
place how that perception of my
experience my emotion was not a signal
to do something blows my mind it blows
my mind I'm just saying it just I can't
imagine an adult being in a situation
with a child that is being treated that
way and not thinking action but yet we
see it all the time all the time we see
it even nowadays all the time there's by
the way the research shows that bullying
has not really decreased in the last 30
40 years really
no it is not it's pretty much about a
third of middle school high school kids
get bullied each day in school and so
this is the point of my work which is
that a lot of the programs out there are
like let's create school rules all right
who's going to follow these rules like
what is how are rules teaching people
skills it's not working my whole
thinking about this is that we need to
teach the things that we've been talking
about empathy perspective taking you
know doing role plays having people
understand what it feels like to be in
that situation like you said you've
never been bullied right and never have
bullied which is great for you which
means it might be harder for you to
understand that because right it the
empathy for you might be a little
tougher yeah that's part of the reason I
asked the question I mean I I was
um debating to myself whether or not I
ask it be in that way because I didn't
want to come across as insensitive but
precisely because I have sat on neither
side um of the bullying equation that
it's kind of a foreign thing to me it
also makes me realize and especially now
after what you just said that while I
was in high school I'm guessing there
was a lot of bullying going I'm sure you
might have witnessed it and I I missed
it yeah you know I had some friends that
could definitely be classified as as
Misfits yeah and I think looking back
they hung out with my group of friends
because we were definitely diff we were
into different things we weren't I we
you know me meaning my peers grew up in
the John Hughes film era where you had
like the jocks versus the hippies versus
the skateboarders versus theout yeah
exactly and you know and I had my crowd
and and was friends with a number of
people outside that crowd but there were
these kids that would hang around us
that um weren't into the same things
that we were and I am looking back and
realizing now that they did it because
they they were definitely safe with us
yeah and
um we could be a little scary if we
wanted to be but we weren't the type to
go out and be scary so we I think they
must have sent some safety with us and
um I actually have very fond memories of
of those kids and know some of them
still now so yeah I I asked that that
way in part because I realized I I
missed a lot well Lord knows I missed a
lot of what was going on in high school
for other reasons but I just missed a
lot of this um and
I think in even in academic culture as
an adult I not now but I certainly
witnessed bullying at meetings more that
was more demonstrative where people
would make fun of um people in general
in a way that I felt suppressed the
likelihood that people would ask
questions which is a kind of different
form of posturing and bullying right
make students afraid to raise their hand
and and ask questions at meetings for
instance um it's intimidation
right intimidation and I experienced
that too I remember when I when I was
younger in my career I was giving a
speech and people were like oh he does
the field research you know like in
school that's soft
science and I was very very fortunate
and I was hurt by it because it's like
by the way like doing your you know
experimen the laboratory with your
sophomores in college is a lot easier
than trying to randomize 60 schools in
Brooklyn and Queens New York and try to
find effects of your program it's hard
research really difficult even just
working on human is hard for those of us
that have worked on both animal models
which I no longer do and humans which
I've done and do um working on humans is
that much harder be for all sorts of
reasons yeah they're not um on the same
genetic background you can't just put
them in their cage take them out the
same like different like dark Cycles
some slept well some didn't sleep well I
mean there are issues with animal work
as well but yeah just even embracing
human research at all is an immense
challenge so the idea that it would be
viewed as soft is um I mean that that's
just like laughable to me but exactly um
but I was very fortunate that there was
a a professor of very senior Professor
his name was Ed Ziggler he was one of
the uh co-founders of
headart and he was like my he became my
adult Uncle Marvin and um I'm giving
this speech and all these people are
like trying to like really like demolish
you know the presentation and my
research and he was re revered because
he was like this famous developmental
psychologist and he just stood up and
he's like he slams the table he's like I
like this
research like and I love you you because
like I needed you to stand up for me
because I'm like the St not the stupid
I'm like the little postto here right
like I need support and uh so you know
my argument is that it's a human right
to be protected right now I could
protect myself now right of course I can
but I'll have to I'll give you another
example of this gosh this is a really
tough one for me me I would say eight
years
ago I was giving a speech at our
University uh to a bunch of
funders and it was me and another
professor who I will not name who is
bigger than I am and bigger personality
than I am and has a kind of rough rep
reputation of being kind of a bully I
went on first now granted I'm a pretty
good presenter
and he was going on after and
I just thank you I went to the side he
gets on now I actually did a
presentation on bullying as a matter
that's why I'm thinking about it all
right I'm I get off stage I'm sitting
you know everybody else he gets on stage
and changes his presentation and shows a
video of a kid being horrifically
bullied which has nothing to do with his
research and I'm thinking what the
hell's going on here and he plays a
video he's like doing that like laughing
to himself and he's like you know I just
want it'll let people know that was Mark
before he got his black
belt and I'm like what a dick yeah it
was not cool and I felt like firstly
what was really interesting to me as a
psychologist is that in that moment I
regressed a 10 years old it was
psychologically all the memories of all
the feelings and the bodily reactions I
was like boom and then you know luckily
you know I do have a fifth degree black
belt luckily I have a PhD in Psychology
luckily I had ch a therapy and I've been
teaching emotional intelligence for 25
years I'm like
Mark you're 50 you've got a black B like
it took me a lot to recover and I had to
make a choice because like I'm still
intimidated by that and I it makes me
sad to even admit it because I don't
like that I'm at this place in my life
where I still can be intimidated by the
bullies but it's how I feel and I have
to just accept
that and I decided
in that
presentation was like Mark like you got
to say something you're going to prove
to yourself that you can do it and so
after he was over you know I waited a
little while and I just went up to him
and I said you know I have no idea what
motivated you to showare that video but
number one it was not cool and number
two it can never happen again never and
I can cry now thinking about it because
it was very difficult for me even as an
adult and of course I ran away I didn't
run away but I you know I took my
breaths I felt proud you know that I was
able to handle myself which you know may
sound strange to some people you know
being an adult who's a psychologist you
know who has a fifth degree black belt I
have to reinforce that now to make
myself feel strong
um but it was such a power it was a it
was a great moment for me one of like
Having the courage to face
bully um and interestingly enough uh the
guy never he was he turned his he he
treated me like I was like the president
of the University after that and
so my point of telling that story is
that like I was
50 like that's old to only to to to
cultivate the skills that I needed right
to be able to deal with that very
difficult situation and my dream is that
you know I always I you know I say I
tell people I'm so envious of that
kindergartner because I've been lucky
enough to be the developer of the
curriculum but I didn't live
it and so it talking about Neuroscience
like I'm not wired like that 5-year-old
is going to be wired because they're
growing up in an environment where every
day they're checking in on their
feelings it reminds me of just another
story I was in a school in Brooklyn and
I mean kids they this one school's been
using our program for a decade and they
wanted the kids wanted to meet me and
the principal of the school who's my
former student um he said you can ask
Mark anything and it's like why do you
do this and what motivates you and and I
was telling these kids the story of my
childhood and this one girl she must
have been in sixth grade she said to
mean it's really hard for me to
understand your experience I said why'
she's like I've been going to this
school since I'm in kindergarten and I
can't think of a day that someone didn't
ask me how I was feeling it's powerful
you know when you think about like her
neural development right all the
pathways that are being built for this
person or these children in thousands of
schools to be learning their feelings
understanding where they're you know why
they're feeling the way they're feeling
to interact with other kids and see how
they're feeling and how they express
their feelings and how they deal with
their feelings and learning strategies
to together in a Cooperative environment
to cultivate and how that gets more
complex with development right because
in kindergarten you're learning about
sadness and disappointment but then
you're learning about Despair and
alienation and
exclusion and that's what makes this
work so interesting is that these
Concepts evolve throughout our lives
right think about it I mean what anger
meant to me when I was five is not what
it meant to me when I was 10 or 15 or 25
or now
55 your description of
confronting this bully I don't even want
to call them your colleague because
there's nothing collegial about I
thought it was an embarrassment for the
University but more importantly the fact
that you were able to confront them is
to me and I think to anybody that hears
that story the definition of courage
yeah you know because it's in the
moments where we feel like this big and
we're collapsed on ourselves and we um
don't know where the resources are and
we don't have somebody sitting there
like holding our shoulder saying listen
I'm going to go talk to them or let's go
talk to them that you you you did that
for yourself you um internalize the um
the lessons you'd
learned initially from your uncle yeah
um and brought that forward and um I
think anyone hearing that story um it's
it's obvious to them that um that is the
a great Act of courage and it's an
inspirational one too and and a reminder
that for people that are being bullied
as adults as well
that it's important to calmly but
directly and firmly Express like you
basically gave him a no like a really
strong like no like you went to a puppy
that was like putting itself in danger
or something except in this case it's a
human being who had agency and so he he
needed a sharp he needed to be he need
be punished slightly yeah he needed to
be
educated about boundaries and about how
this game of being a colleague is played
well certainly not rewarded you're right
punished isn't the right word he he
certainly um whatever um dopamine hit he
got from that that I think part of antic
was just um needed that needed to be
retracted that needed to be taken away
from him yeah and I think that we should
spend a minute on punishment because it
never works you know unless it's
consistent harsh and nobody wants to be
punished because it doesn't feel good
and it doesn't teach people anything
right go to your room what does that
teach me it teach me to go to my room
and ruminate and get angrier
I've been in schools that are not using
our model you know I'll never forget
this one moment where I was in a
principal's office a kid had given the
teacher the finger and got thrown to the
office and it was a
Tuesday and uh it was Tuesday before the
next week was going to be a holiday
break and the uh you know you got it was
a two-day suspension you know for giving
the teacher the finger but that was
going to be till Thursday and then
Friday you know after that there'd be a
week break and the I literally heard the
principal say let's just make it 3 days
so we don't have to see this kid for 10
days and I'm thinking what is this
person learning about empathy about
self-regulation about emotional
awareness they're learning nothing
they're going to be thrown out with no
skills in an environment that's probably
not supportive and so I just think this
has has to change and it still does
happen not as often thank goodness um
I'm a prevention scientist so I I don't
want to wait until everyone has an
anxiety disorder and everyone's been
bullied I want to cultivate a society
where people have the skills they need
to navigate their emotions and know how
to build healthy relationships and make
sound decisions and have good mental
health and achieve their
dreams and it occurred to me just now
that you effectively doing what your
uncle did for you but for millions and
millions of people you know God bless
Uncle Marvin I have a you know as you
know now the uh the Storyteller but one
of the most profound moments of my
career was just after I had written my
book and I was on my book tour I'm in
Westchester New York and I'm giving a
speech and I had never spoken about my
uncle in that level of detail nor my
abuse by the way I talk about courage it
was not till 48 writing this book that
decided like people ask me like why are
you so passionate and I would say I
hated school I was bullied but I believe
I was robbed of my emotional life as a
child because of the
abuse and you know my circumstances and
I felt I need to just share that a
little bit not the focus but I needed to
be I need to be real so I'm sharing
about Uncle Marvin the sixth grade
teacher from monacello New York
State and this guy has this like like
that woman in the audience he had an
epiphany he's like are you talking about
Marvin Moore the sixth grade social
study teacher from monell New York I'm
like like yes he's like Mark you're not
going to believe this but your uncle
Marvin was my uncle Marvin I'm like are
you kidding me he's like your uncle was
my sixth grade teacher 45 years ago and
he's the reason why I teach I was blown
away I was like I was like I was shaking
so excited that I never met one of my
uncle's actual students cuz you know we
worked when I was older he he was older
and so I um I sent to the guy I got to
finish my speech but can I interview you
afterwards he's like yeah I so I
interview this guy I have it on tape 45
minutes what he remembered about his
sixth grade social studies class I mean
I have no memories of my social studies
class this guy remembered details of my
uncle's facial expression body language
the way he taught feelings the way he
taught history it was on and on and on
but here's the
kicker so we're done with
this conversation and he looks at me and
he's like you know Mark it's it's really
clear
that your uncle had a profound influence
on your life and so I just have one
question for
you for whom are you and Uncle
Marvin and it just
like like I'm the professor here I'm the
one who does the teaching right I do the
research you don't ask me questions like
that and it was so eye opening for me
about just you know my life in terms of
how I spend my time with my own family
and am I giving that non-judgment am I
giving that active listening am I
showing my empathy and compassion I'm
like I'm a workaholic you know I write
the papers I'm not living it and it
really has made a profound difference
for me you know I really try
hard uh to be an uncle Marvin and it's
tough because time right all the factors
that we talked about earlier but gosh
you know if we only had more of those in
our world well it's absolutely clear to
me that you're extremely passionate
about this mission of teaching people
what emotions are and how to work with
them giving them really clear systems to
do that tools that they can do that and
uh I think it's fair to say that um you
answered your own question in my opinion
um if I may that you know you through
your uncle Marvin to you and through the
work that you do and through your public
education effort which includes your
graciousness in coming here and sharing
with us what you know um what you
believe people can benefit from and I
it's absolutely clear to me that people
can so benefit from these tools and what
you put into your book which does
include some very personal things that
um I must say are entirely couched
toward the
reader understanding and learning how
they can make themselves and others and
the world a better place it's um it's
really extraordinary I appreciate that
the um the Rippling out effect um is not
uh sufficient way to describe it it's
really an enormous amplification of the
hard work you've done and I'm just
really really in awe of the fact that
you've taken hard experiences and
transmuted those into so much good and
so on behalf of myself and everyone
listening and watching just want to
extend an enormous Deb of gratitude this
is truly important work and I don't say
that lightly I really appreciate that
thank you thank you for joining me for
today's discussion with Dr Mark bracket
to learn more about his work and to find
links to his book permission to feel
which by the way I highly recommend as
well as other links to his laboratory
and other resources please see the links
in the show note captions if you're
learning from Andor enjoying this
podcast please subscribe to our YouTube
channel that's a terrific Z costway to
support us another terrific zeroc
costway to support us is to follow the
podcast on both Spotify and apple and on
both Spotify and apple you can leave us
up to a five-star review please also
check out the sponsors mentioned at the
beginning and throughout today's episode
that's the best way to support this
podcast if you have questions for me or
comments about the podcast or topics or
guests you'd like me to consider for the
huberman Lab podcast please put those in
the comment section on YouTube I do read
all the comments for those of you that
haven't heard I have a new book coming
out it's my very first book book it's
entitled protocols an operating manual
for the human body this is a book that
I've been working on for more than 5
years and that's based on more than 30
years of research and experience and it
covers protocols for everything from
sleep to exercise to Stress Control
protocols related to focus and
motivation and of course I provide the
scientific substantiation for the
protocols that are included the book is
now available by pre-sale at protocols
book.com there you can find links to
various vendors you can pick the one
that you like best again the book is
called protocols an operating manual for
the human body if you're not already
following me on social media I'm
huberman lab on all social media
channels so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter threads Facebook and
Linkedin and on all those platforms I
discuss science and science related
tools some of which overlaps with the
content of the hubman Lab podcast but
much of which is distinct from the
content of the hubman Lab podcast again
that's huberman lab on all social media
platforms and if you haven't already
subscribe to our neural network
newsletter the neural network newsletter
is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that
includes podcast summaries as well as
protocols in the form of brief one to
three-page PDFs protocols that cover
things like learning and neuroplasticity
how to optimize and regulate your
dopamine how to improve your sleep again
all available completely zero cost you
simply go to hubman lab.com go to the
menu tab scroll down to newsletter and
provide your email and I should point
out that we do not share your email with
anybody thank you once again for joining
me for today's discussion all about
emotions with Dr Mark bracket and last
but certainly not least thank you for
your interest in science
[Music]