welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Ari wallik
Ari wallik is an adjunct associate
professor at Columbia University's
School of International and public
affairs he is also the host of a new TV
series a brief history of the future
today's discussion focuses on perhaps
one of the most important questions that
any and all of us have to ask ourselves
at some point which is how is it that we
are preparing this planet for the future
not just for our children if we happen
to have children or want children but
for all people the human brain as we
know is capable of orienting its
thoughts and its memories to the past to
the present or to the future but few
people actually take the time to think
about the future that they are creating
on this planet and in culture within our
families etc for the next generation and
generations that follow them Ari wallik
is an expert in this topic and he has
centered his work around what he calls
long Path Labs which is a focus on
long-term thinking and coordinated
Behavior at the individual
organizational and societal level in
order to best ensure the thriving of our
species and while that may sound a bit
aspirational it is both aspirational and
grounded in specific actions and logic
so during today's episode re Wallock
spells out for us not just the
aspirations not just what we want but
how to actually create that positive
future and Legacy for ourselves for our
families and for Society at large it's
an extremely interesting take on how to
live now in a way that is positively
building toward the future so by the end
of today's episode you will have a
unique perspective on how your brain
works how you frame time perception and
indeed how you frame your entire life
before you begin I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is separate from my
teaching and research roles at Stanford
it is however part of my desire and
effort to bring zero cost to Consumer
information about science and science
related tools to the general public in
keeping with that theme I'd like to
thank the sponsors of today's podcast
our first sponsor is David David makes a
protein bar unlike any other it has 28
grams of protein only 150 calories and 0
grams of sugar that's right 28 grams of
protein and 75% of its calories come
from protein this is 50% higher than the
next closest protein bar These Bars from
David also taste incredible my favorite
bar is the cake flavored one but then
again I also like the chocolate flavored
one and I like the berry flavored one
basically I like all the flavors they're
all incredibly delicious now for me
personally I try to get most of my
calories from Whole Foods however when
I'm in a rush or I'm away from home or
I'm just looking for a quick afternoon
snack I often find that I'm looking for
a highquality protein source and with
David I'm able to get 28 gam of
highquality protein with the calories of
a snack which makes it very easy to hit
my protein goals of one gram of protein
per pound of body weight and it allows
me to do so without taking on an excess
of calories as I mentioned before they
are incredibly delicious in fact they're
surprisingly delicious even the
consistency is great it's more like a
cookie consistency kind of a chewy
cookie consistency which is unlike other
bars which I tend to kind of saturate on
I was never a big fan of bars until I
discovered David bars if you give them a
try you'll know what I mean so if you'd
like to try David you can go to David
protein.com huberman again the link is
david.com huberman today's episode is
also brought To Us by Helix sleep Helix
sleep makes mattresses and pillows that
are customized to your unique sleep
needs I've spoken many times before on
this and other podcast about the fact
that getting a great night's sleep is
the foundation of mental health physical
health and performance now the mattress
we sleep on makes an enormous difference
in terms of the quality of sleep that we
get each night we need a mattress that
is matched to our unique sleep needs one
that is neither too soft nor too hard
for you one that breathes well and that
won't be too warm or too cold for you if
you go to the Helix website you can take
a brief two-minute quiz and it asks you
questions such as do you sleep on your
back your side or your stomach do you
tend to run hot or cold during the night
things of that sort maybe you know the
answers to those questions maybe you
don't either way Helix will match you to
the ideal mattress for you for me that
turned out to be the dusk mattress D us
I've been sleeping on a dusk mattress
for gosh now more than four years and
the sleep that I've been getting is
absolutely phenomenal so if you'd like
to try Helix you can go to
helixsleep.com
huberman take that two-minute sleep quiz
and Helix will match you to a mattress
that's customized for your unique sleep
needs right now Helix is giving up to
25% off all mattress orders again that's
helixsleep.com
huberman to get up to 25% off today's
episode is also brought To Us by Roka
Roa makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that
are of the absolute highest quality I've
spent a lifetime working on the biology
of the visual system and I can tell you
that your visual system has to contend
with an enormous number of different
challenges in order for you to be able
to see clearly from moment to moment Roa
understands all of that and has designed
all of their ey glasses and sunglasses
with the biology of the visual system in
mind Roa eyeglasses and sunglasses were
first designed for use in sport in
particular for things like running and
cycling and as a consequence Roa frames
are extremely lightweight so much so
that most of the time you don't even
remember that you're wearing them and
they're also designed so that they don't
slip off even if you get sweaty now even
though Roa eyeglasses and sunglasses
were initially designed for sport they
now have many different frames and
styles all of which can be used not just
for sport but also for wearing out to
dinner to work essentially any time in
any setting I wear Roa readers at night
or Roa eyeglasses if I'm driving at
night and I wear Roa sunglasses in the
middle of the day anytime it's too
bright for me to see clearly my eyes are
somewhat sensitive so I need that I
particularly like the hunter 2.0 frames
which I have as eyeglasses and now as
Sun glasses too if you'd like to try Roa
you can go to roka.com huberman to get
20% off your purchase again that's
roka.com huberman to get 20% off and now
for my discussion with Ari wallik Ari
Wallock welcome Andrew hubman thank you
for having me you and I go way back and
I think that's a good way to frame
today's conversation not by talking
about our history by any stretch but
because really what I want to understand
is about time and time perception so
without going into a long
dialogue the human brain is capable of
this amazing thing of being able to
think about the past the present or the
future or some combination of the three
if other animals and insects do that I
wouldn't be surprised but we do that and
we do it pretty well provided all our
mental faculties are
intact one of the key aspects to brain
function however is to use that ability
to try and set goals reach goals and
that's a neurochemical process and I
would say these days more than ever we
operate on short time frame reward
schedules
meaning we want something we generally
have ways of getting it pretty quickly
or at least the information about how we
might get it pretty quickly and we
either get it or we don't and of course
it involves dopamine and a bunch of
other things as well
a lot of your work is focused on linking
our perception of what we're doing in
the present with knowledge about the
past and trying to project our current
decision-making into the future to try
and create a better
future and that's some pretty heavy
mental gymnastics especially when many
perhaps most but certainly many many
people worldwide are just trying to like
get through their day without feeling
overly anxious without letting their
health get out of control without or I
should say their illness get out of
control uh and on and on so to kick the
ball out I've got this long- winded
question and it is indeed a question
which
is how do we navigate this conundrum
like if we really care about the
future what do we want to do where do we
want to place our mental frame and how
do we start going about doing
that it's a great question or a great
series of questions um one of the things
that homo sapiens do extremely well is
what we call mental time travel we're
able to actually take ourselves in the
current moment and project out in fact
Marty Seligman uh kind of the the father
of positive psychology put forth this
idea in this great book called homo
prospectus that what separates us out
from almost every other species as far
as we know the ones we can talk to
mostly us is that that we do two things
extremely well we can do mental time
travel towards the future right we can
think about different possible outcomes
different possible scenarios and we can
collaborate to make the ones that we
want to see manifest manifest and that
involves language that involves social
interaction a whole bunch of other
things but at the end of the day what we
do extremely well as far as we know
we're the only ones who do it and I
think this is part of the reasons why
we're so good at what we do as a
dominant on this planet is to project
out into Futures that we want we know
where this comes from Mostly it's it's
it's coming from the hippo campus right
which one thing about the campus that's
amazing is that it's it's almost
atemporal it doesn't actually have a
time stamp and so what it does is it
takes snapshots of epithetic memories
that have happened in the past
reassembles them so that we can mentally
time travel and then figure out these
different future scenarios of what might
happen so if we take Ari and Andy
150,000 years ago he calls me Andy folks
but Andrew no it's okay just stick with
Andy but I'm gonna stick with Andy I'm
giving you permission for at least the
duration of this episode duration of
this episode so uh Andrew now Andy look
here's the thing if Arian Andy are out
on the serengetti 150,000 years ago
right we Homo sapiens about 200,000
years ago about 150,000 years ago we're
kind of starting to spread out of the
rift valley into Africa and we're now at
a point where we're no longer longer
singular but we're within a kind of a
small tribal structure we want to start
hunting larger and larger game we're no
longer reactive so if we want to go
after that game it's not a foregone
conclusion that when we go after
something it's going to do what we
wanted to do we have to start thinking
about different scenarios so that first
kind of mental time travel is really
coming from our desire for for more
protein to exist and to to grow the
group and really to feed the super
energy intensive thing called the human
brain that's where mental time travel
starts and hippocampus takes different
memories of different ways we've hunted
and and been successful in the past or
not successful and starts to put
together
scenarios now fast forward so that's a
very long time ago you you you take us
you know through through through the
Middle East into Europe into Asia 20,000
years ago our ancestors cross Binga
which is now the the the bearing
straight and we're we're in North
America and fast forward to right now on
my way in here I get a notification on
my phone Ding and I immediately pick up
the phone to see and and you've covered
this before what what's that new
information what is it that I have to
react to so we're working on two 300,000
year old Hardware at the same time we
have a cultural substrate that is for
lack of better words has hacked into
that older part of us to make us a want
that immediate gratification and B
Force us to now react in a way where
that mental time travel has closed that
temporal Horizon we're now training
ourselves no longer to think about the
far future but to actually think about
the immediate present and I don't mean
present in a in a in a in a Buddhist way
I mean presentism as in a Hall of
Mirrors there is no past there is no
future there's only this moment and so
it's becoming extremely difficult for us
as individuals as societies as
civilization to think about the long
term in in the way that you and I may
have done 150,000 years ago because
winter was coming and we were start
thinking where are we going to move our
family and our tribe or our clan and we
we would go to warmer climates we don't
even do that anymore right we're so in
this moment that it's becoming extremely
difficult for us to break out of this
presentist moment I really appreciate
your answer for a couple of reasons um
through the 9s and early 2000s and maybe
even until
2020 there was a growing
movement within science but also outside
of
science towards encouraging people to be
mindful this whole notion of being
present right but what you're describing
is actually too
much being present what you're calling
presentism and of course it depends on
what what's happening in the present um
but in the 80s in the 90s in the 2000s
up to about
2020 of course we're still in the 2000s
there was this notion of future tripping
like people are future tripping they're
spending too much time worrying about
the future too much time worrying about
the future I feel like the Horizon on
our cognition has really come closer in
now and as you said we're in this like
sort of Hall of Mirrors where it's
constant stimulus in response and I
don't want today's discussion to be Doom
and Gloom we're going to talk about
Solutions but I think between what
you're saying and what Jonathan height
who was on this podcast author of
anxious generation codling in the
American mind professor at NYU Etc has
said I'm starting to really believe that
yes the human brain can focus on past
present or future or some combination
but that something about the
architecture of our Technologies and our
human interactions because those are so
closely interwoven that's taking place
now has us really locked in the present
in stimulus response and I'm going to um
just briefly reference a previous
episode of the podcast I did it's it's
one of my favorite conversations ever on
off microphone was which which was
excuse me with Dr James Hollis
84-year-old yian psychoanalyst where he
had many important messages there but
one of them was we need we absolutely
need to take 5 to 10 minutes each day to
exit stimulus response mode typically by
closing one's eyes and just looking
inward it doesn't even have to be called
meditation in order to understand what
our greater wishes are how to link our
current thinking and behavior to the
Future and to the past and and I think
he's um qualified to say this because
he's an analyst that that process
actually is a reflection of the
unconscious mind so to link these
Concepts in in a more coherent way is it
possible that we are just overwhelmed
with notifications either the
traditional type of notifications on
your phone but but that we're basically
just living in stimulus response all the
time now and if so what direction is
that taking ourselves at individuals as
families as communities and you know as
a as a species um I'm basically
validating what you just said even
though you don't need my validation and
just asking like how bad is it to just
be focused on managing the dayto day or
maybe that's that's a better way to go
about life you need to manage the
day-to- day there there are people like
me who are full-time futurists we tend
to be very anxious because what we tend
to do is think more in the future and AR
as present as we should be that being
said
if 90% of your day is going about your
day dealing with what's right in front
of you that's great what what I'm
advocating for
is what what I call kind of
transgenerational empathy it's a
mouthful uh so we know empathy you know
you've had guess on that
transgenerational empathy first and
foremost starts with empathy and
compassion for yourself then we move
into empathy for those who came before
which then allows us to build empathy
for the future future future Ari future
future Andy but then future generations
and we we can get into how to do that
yeah maybe we could just parse each of
those one by one so how do you define
empathy for self so empathy for yourself
is in many ways it's almost
self-compassion it's recognizing you're
doing the best you can with what you
have part of the issue is we we surround
ourselves I and I'm guilty of this of of
images and quotes and books of how to
live your best life that how how to be
amazing and anything below that metric
of perfection you start to feel terrible
and you start to kind of ruminate over
what what you you know you lie in bed at
night and you think how could I have
done that how could I have done that and
you forget that you you're only able to
handle what you can at that time and you
can't hold yourself up to this idealized
yard stick look I Del through this for
for a long time we learned my father had
stage four cancer I was 18 years old um
and from from R he learned to when he
passed away it was only four months four
months four months and for for for a lot
of that
time um I was kind of in denial right
like I wasn't actually there with him as
much as I should have been in fact we're
not going to we won't go into this I was
actually with you that summer we were
working together that that summer um at
at a summer camp now for years I beat
myself up how could I have done that I
should have been home with him it was
only going to be four months
and then I realized and this is this
self-compassion like 18-year-old Ari was
only at a place emotionally in
psychologically to be able to do what I
did and it wasn't the older 30 or 40y
old Ari of now being like of having
these regrets so empathy for yourself
really really centers you it doesn't
mean you let yourself off the hook it
doesn't mean you can go willy-nilly and
treat people terribly it means you
recognize that who you were even
yesterday is in many ways different than
who you are today and and what what
you've learned so transgenerational
empathy has to start with yourself it
has to start with being able to look in
the mirror and say I'm not perfect I was
born into this world uh into a family
into uh you know like my my my my birth
family or or or you know family that you
choose and they were born into something
and you work with what you have but you
have to start there because so many
times I I I work with people I talk to
people and they say oh I want to have
empathy and you know for for for the
past and for the future but they don't
have it for themselves so if you don't
start there it becomes very very
difficult to to spread out uh first
obviously going backwards and then
ultimately the goal of my work is to get
you to spread that out into the future I
love this concept of empathy for self
because I've heard it before in other
contexts but I haven't heard it
operationalized the way that you
describe it I think um yeah we uh
there's a two two phrases that come to
mind uh there's a book uh called a
Fighter's Heart by Sam Sheridan and um
it's a pretty interesting account of all
the different forms of martial arts and
fighting and there's an interesting part
of the book where he says you know you
can't have your 20th birthday until
you're 19 which is a big giant duh but
it's actually a pretty profound
statement and by the way he went to
Harvard he's a smart kid his father was
a in the SEAL Teams he he has an
interesting lineage in his own right and
I think what at Harvard he he claims he
just um painted and smoked cigarettes so
you know bit of a bit of a uh bit of an
iconic last in any case I think that
statement you can't have your 20th
birthday until you're 19 is something
that that we forget because of the
immense amount of attention that we pay
to uh trying to be like others and
satisfy external metrics and so I like
to think he he was in agreement with you
uh if I may the the other um thing that
happened to me recently that comes to
mine is that um I like many people
peruse Instagram I teach on Instagram
Etc and there are a lot of these quote
accounts like like life inspiration
accounts and and I would argue that the
halflife of any one of those posts is is
pretty short but some are are pretty
interesting and and there's a guy I'll
put it in the show note captions I don't
remember off the top of my head um not a
huge account not a small account I think
he lives in Austin
and he goes through this long discourse
about the challenges of the human mind
for a lot of the reasons that we're
talking about its ability to flit from
past to present to Future Etc but then
he says you know it basically just SS
down to one actionable step per day or
per morning um which is at some point if
you want to grow and be more functional
you have to ask yourself you what am I
going to do today to make my day better
not to be better than I was yesterday
right which is also a fine statement but
that one never really resonated for me
because like yesterday could have been
an amazing day you might not be as good
as yesterday right every day is kind of
its own unique unit and our biology
really does function on these circadian
biology units of 24 hours there's no
negotiating that so I I like this
concept of what what can I do today to
make my life and hopefully the lives of
others better because it it implies a
verb in action step and it's really
focused on the unit of the day which is
really what we've got um so that
resonated so according to your
Definition empathy for self starts with
understanding that we're always doing
the best we can with what we've got but
that there's a striving kind of woven
into that statement that that there is a
need for striving um at what point do we
start to develop empathy for others and
what does that look like like is empathy
for somebody else um feeling what they
feel I mean that's the kind of
traditional definition yeah I mean look
we we start off with kind of cognitive
intellectual empathy right so you you
kind of think it um but where you really
want to be able to be is at a place
where your their their feelings are
feelings that you can feel and you want
to bring if they're if they're feeling
bad you want to bring some resolution to
that if they're feeling good you can you
can be there with them at a fundamental
level this is you know mirror neurons
and I'm connecting with you and you are
connecting with me and there's a genetic
adaptive Fitness for that right we all
want to kind of be in sync because the
tribe that works together flourishes
together and thrives together so it
makes sense at that
level but when I'm feeling empathy for
another their state of being can be as
important as my own state of being um it
can be look it can be taxing don't get
me wrong but ultimately that is what
self-compassion can give you because it
can give you a state of being where
those around you you are no longer
fundamentally disconnected and I think
one of the the great errors of where we
have taken this civilization over the
past several decades if not centuries is
is disconnection disconnection from
ourselves disconnection from each other
and disconnection from nature in the
planet so anything we can do to further
that connection is going to benefit us
today in the current moment I agree um
completely if we were to break that down
um into the requirements for empathy and
connection uh one it seems like presence
like we we need to be present like we're
going to appreciate a a fern a beautiful
Fern or a dog or a significant other or
another human being that we happen to
encounter we have to be present we can't
if we're going to have empathy we our
mind can't be someplace else can't be
wandering right can't be in the past
can't be in the future or we're not
going to be able to really touch into
the details and the of the experience so
that seems like requirement number one
the second is that we need to be able to
leave whatever um kind of pressures are
on us to to tend to other things right
like every neural circuit we know has a
push and a pull like in order to get a
you need to suppress B and this is the
way neural circuits work generally you
know flexors and extensors in the
muscles are a good analogy uh for uh
which by the way you know like if you're
going to flex your bicep um your your
tricep is essentially relaxing and vice
versa in so many so many words the pts
are going to dive all over me for that
one but in that's sort of how neural
circuits in the brain work we we can
actually see all around us by virtue of
neurons that respond to either
increments and decrements in light and
their difference is actually what allows
us to see boundaries borders visually so
um we need to suppress like our thoughts
about where we need to be that day or
other things that are going on for us
and then we need to be able to return to
our own you know self atttention in
order to to be functional and I think
that I think this is where the challenge
is and where the next question arises
which is on the one hand
I could imagine that okay we've got so
many pressures upon us every day all day
that it's getting much harder to be
present to be empathic and to build this
idealized future or better future but on
the other hand I hear you and other
people saying well things are so much
better than they were even 50 years ago
in terms of health outcomes believe it
or not in terms of you know status of uh
people having shelter Etc and this is a
shock to a lot of people they're like
wait a second I didn't see homeless
people on the street when I was a kid
and now I do well they were the people
suffering were elsewhere you didn't
perhaps didn't see them so there are a
couple levels of question here but the
first one is um perhaps are we much
better
off but we are worse off in the sense
that there's so much incoming that we
miss the fact that we're better off like
you know is it like notifications
preventing us from seeing that we
actually have so much that we're we're
we're you know 100 times better than off
than we were as a species 50 years ago
because I I feel like a lot of the
debates that I see online about climate
change about health about longevity it's
like it's overwhelming because I feel
like people aren't aren't agreeing on
the first principles so let's start with
with this are are human beings better
off in terms of Health and Longevity
than we were let's go short scale 50
years ago so look in aggregate because
we can find Peaks and valleys right when
when we zoom in if we pull back there's
no better time to be alive as a homo
sapien on planet Earth than right now
now someone's going to argue right now
and they're going to say no no no no I
mean according to what metrics like
happiness health infant mortality uh
even even as we backslide in this
country being a woman um
education uh the kind of the calories
that we get across the look if you and I
go outside and you stepped on a rusty
nail 100 years ago good chance you would
die right now we just go to the you know
to the to the drugstore and put
something on it or we even know that we
don't have to put anything on it we can
just put it underneath high pressure
water for 30 seconds and that'll clean
out because we now know germ Theory
right so net net this is the best time
to be alive all the markers you can go
to Gap minder if you want and you can
see that we are doing better we are
progressing the issue is that we are now
at an inflection point because the
things that we do or do not do across
the major issues of our day and how we
deal with them climate change artificial
intelligence synthetic
biology
um what we do or do not do will dictate
not only the next several years and
several decades potentially the next
several centuries so so you've hit it
we're being bombarded by information
most of the information we're attracted
to is the negative negativity bias you
and I on this we're going to go back to
RN Andy 150,000 years ago if we saw this
beautiful tree aesthetically and we saw
maybe a tree over here that was on fire
you and I would zoom in on the tree on
fire and focus on the negative because
negative things hurt and kill us that
being said if you and I run a major
Media Company you and I both know that
the more negative stories that we put
out the more hits we're going to get the
more this media not this media company
I'm just I'm not getting but all the
other way well that I I would argue some
of your success comes from the fact that
you don't wallow in the negativity and
there's a real thirst and a hunger and
desire to learn more about who we are
and how we can make ourselves better but
that negativity bias is still part of us
right I think one of the one of the
issues that we have to confront as a
society is that there are parts of us
the the the prefrontal cortex parts of
us that are amazing that build
microphones that have conversations that
stream across the internet and then
there are parts of us you know this is
Jonathan's elephant and the writer there
are parts of us that happen below the
surface that have hundreds of thousands
if not millions of years of legacy and
we often want to either be up here and
say oh we're so smart we're so great or
we want to wallow in the in the kind of
the death and despair and the horrific
things that we can do to one another you
know my personal past on my father's
side is I think some of the darkest
moments in Homo Sapien behavior and that
was not that long
ago so if we want to move in into a
place that allows us to ask what I think
is the the fundamental question of our
time which is how do we become the great
ancestors the future needs us to be we
need to find a way to both tap into to
the to the elephant and the writer which
will'll do a better job of me expl in
explaining than I will no I love this
idea I I mean we could map it to neural
circuits but I love this idea of high
level Concepts and and then neural
circuits that are very um what Dr Paul
KY was on this podcast psychiatrist
brilliant psychiatrist said you know the
the the the lyic system yeah um the
emotional system doesn't know or care
about the clock or the calendar it just
elicits feeling yeah doesn't care about
whether or not that feeling is relevant
to the past the present or the future it
just it just has a job which is just
just bring out a particular feeling
you're jumping ahead a little bit but
that's okay because what what you're
jumping into is when we ask and we want
to have an empathic connection we want
to have empathy with future
Generations we don't want it to just be
cognitive we don't want it just to be
intellectual we actually want it to be
emotional so if I ask someone uh what do
you want the future to be like for your
great grandkids in the in the 2080s and
they give me a list of kind of bullet
points but they're usually externalized
bullet points shelter Health Care yeah
and then I follow up and you know we've
done this in other people much smarter
than me have done this studies we say
yako trop at NYU is the one who taught
me this um how do you want them to
feel that's different right this is
damaso's um this is somatic marker
hypothesis Theory right where if you
really want something to happen it's not
just about visualizing it it's about
visualizing it and connecting it to the
emotional amydala sense of what that is
to actually move towards the actions and
changing the behaviors that you want
Madison Avenue understands this
marketing understands this they don't
but the general public tends not to
sorry I keep interrupt you but also it's
way as the kids say sorry not sorry in
the sense that I want to make sure that
I highlight something um Martha Beck is
somebody who I think has done some
really brilliant work creating practices
where when one is not feeling what they
want to feel um you know there's this
kind of question like are you supposed
to feel your feelings or are you
supposed to create new feelings in place
of them especially if they're unpleasant
it's it's like there's no clear answer
to that because it's
complicated infinite number of variables
but she does have this interesting
practice whereby it's it's a bit like a
meditation where if you're struggling
with something like maybe you're
struggling with boredom or not knowing
where to go with your life or you're not
happy or you just feel some underlying
anxiety to think back to a time when you
felt particularly blank like a time when
you felt particularly empowered or
particularly curious um it could be very
specific particularly um amused because
and the idea is that in anchoring to the
emotion State first you call to mind a
bunch of potential action steps and the
reason I like this um approach is that
that is at least one way that quote
unquote the brain works which is that
the emotion states are linked to a bunch
of action step possibilities kind of
like a magic Library where if you go
into the room called sadness there are a
bunch of action steps associated with
that go beyond crying it's like curling
up in the fetal position Etc you go into
the room that's called um Advent you
know excitement and and there's all this
idea about getting in vehicles and going
places and things of that sort so what
you're talking about is
I
believe thinking about the emotional
states of others and then from there I
think this is where you're going to go
cultivating some action steps that you
can take to ensure that that future
generation can access those emotions yes
but with a slight correction because
it's not about thinking about their
future emotional states it's actually
feeling them I see so it's not saying I
want my kids to be happy I want them to
Fe I want them to have no trauma
it's um it's feeling what it would be to
have to be happy no trauma yes right
because that becomes like that becomes
an anchor right that this she's 100%
correct what it does is but it places it
it's like a cat anchor so if you and I
were sailor which we're not we would
there's a thing called a CED anchor and
a CJ anchor is this anchor that you
throw you know 30 40 meters off to the
side it hits the bottom and you use the
rope to pull yourself
there emotions will pull us towards
those Futures it will alter the
behaviors so time and time again when we
intellectualize and we become overly
cognitive in terms of Futures that we
want to see happen for ourselves future
Ari or or future wallik family or future
Society or future civil Global planetary
civilization if we think about it that's
one thing but to actually execute on
those goals we have to actually connect
the emotional state that we want to be
in to drive that function remember look
this is one of the things that Marty
Selman says that that Freud got it wrong
Freud felt as Marty says that emotions
were these things that we that happened
in the past that we would use to dwell
on and that was neurosis and anxiety and
depression no no no no emotions are
there to help us make better decisions
for the future we are future oriented
mammals and species so what emotions do
it's not meant to be like oh you know I
I had this like terrible breakup I feel
so terrible
uh then I'm going to go to my therapist
I'm going to talk about all that stuff
that happened in the past that's one way
of looking at the other way is your body
is telling you in a very very visceral
way whatever you just did to that had
you in that situation don't do it again
because if you do you're going to feel a
certain way you know they did this study
where they at at a college campus they
they found people who had just been in a
kind of a quasi longterm relationship
that had gone through a breakup quasi
long-term fine what I've learned what
I've learned in life is it's important
to define the relationship it was about
six months um and people had gone to the
breakup they they gave they gave you
know one group of placebo and another
group actually just got aaminin got
Tylenol and the group that got the
acetaminophen actually felt better why
because those because em we actually
feel emotions we actually feel pain that
some of the same circuits are being
tripped and so that says to me that
emotions are there to guide future
action so we can have pro-social
emotions awe and empathy and compassion
and this this's one we call
love as what we're connected to the
Future Generations that we want to see
how we want to see them flourish we are
much more likely to see that happen than
if we just have a vision of what
tomorrow will look like at an
intellectual kind of two-dimensional
level I'd like to take a quick break and
ackowledge our sponsor ag1 by now many
of you have heard me say that if I could
take Just One supplement that supplement
would be ag1 the reason for that is ag1
is the highest quality and most complete
of the foundational nutritional
supplements available what that means is
that it contains not just vitamins and
minerals but also probiotics prebiotics
and adaptogens to cover any gaps you may
have in your diet and provide support
for a demanding life for me even if I
eat mostly Whole Foods and minimally
processed foods which I do for most of
my food intake it's very difficult for
me to get enough fruits and vegetables
vitamins and minerals micronutrients and
adaptogens from food alone for that
reason I've been taking ag1 daily since
2012 and often twice a day once in the
morning or midm morning and again in the
afternoon or evening when I do that it
clearly bolsters my energy my immune
system and my gut microbiome these are
all critical to brain function mood
physical performance and much more if
you'd like to try ag1 you can go to
drink a1.com huberman to claim their
special offer right now they're giving
away five free travel packs plus a year
supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that drink
a1.com huberman to claim that special
offer I really like this because it gets
to so many themes that have been
discussed on this podcast previously and
that exist in the Neuroscience
literature of like yes emotions don't
know the clock or the calendar yeah and
that sounds like a bad thing and
oftentimes it's discussed as a bad thing
like oh when you're feeling stressed
you're not able to access the parts of
your brain that can make better
decisions we we know that's true except
in of what's immediately pressing I mean
I would say that stress in the short
term makes us much better thinkers and
movers for sake of survival yeah um in
the long term it's it's
problematic but the way that you're
describing emotions as a CJ anchor is
that what it's called CED with a K yep
yeah CJ anchor interesting um as a c
anchor to pull us forward also leverages
the fact that emotions don't know about
the clock or the calendar
and that the order of operations here
seems to be emotions first then action
steps born out of those emotions and
then future State hopefully arrived at
if it's a you know set along the right
path
yeah I like that a lot um and again it
maps to some of the work that has
largely existed at least to my knowledge
in popular psychology or whatever you
want to call it self-help again I'm a
big Martha Beck fan in part because um
of an exercise that she's included in I
think several if not all her books of
this perfect day exercise have you done
this exercise it's a very interesting
exercise you um you first uh sit with
your eyes closed and you imagine like
really terrible stuff and you experience
it in your body and you experience it in
your mind and you just pay attention to
how it feels and and it sucks it doesn't
feel good um most people don't have too
much trouble doing that exercise then
you shift over I think you're supposed
to take a little break or maybe move
around a little bit and then you do a
perfect day exercise where no rules you
lie down or sit down close your eyes and
you can imagine your date includes
anything you want you can be anywhere
you want you the the room can morph from
one country to the next it doesn't
matter and you also experience the
sensations in your body and in that
second exercise it's remarkable I've
done it several times now there are
Little Seeds of things kind of pop out
where you go oh like I didn't realize
that would be part of my perfect day and
they're not um outside the bounds of
reality and those are things that then
you write down and that at least in my
life have um all borne out so this is
something an exercise you do routinely
and when I first heard about this I was
like okay this seems like like weird
self- hypnosis self-help woo stuff like
I'm not like come on I'm like I'm a at
that time I'm like I'm a neuroscience
Professor like I'm not going to like you
got to be kidding me and it's a
remarkable exercise and um the reason I
bring it up now in discussion with you
is I think you and Martha arrived at a
similar place or a similar Avenue but in
your case you're talking about
specifically toward building a future
that's not necessarily for you to live
in but for someone else to live in oh
look the
the the the core of My Philosophy is is
in a story that I heard a very long time
ago it comes it comes from the TM mod
that being said the story exists in many
cultures and so there's a there's a
there's a man named Hony walking you
know and he comes across a much older
man who's planting a carab tree and he
says to the older man you know why are
you planting a carab tree this how long
will it be until this carab tree bears
fruit or even has shade and he goes oh
it'll be at least 40 years and he goes
well why why plant it you know you won't
be around for that and the old man says
when I was young I played in the shade
of a carob tree I ate from the carab
tree so it's my job to plant this carab
tree now um this is how societies move
forward this is how we become great is
by planting carab trees whose shade we
will never know and look I can give you
a bunch of you know the Panama Canal
right that was a great you know it
another way that we think about this
call this Cathedral thinking so now when
we know we're we're in California
they'll put up a home in 3 or 4 days but
back in the day it took a really long
time to build great things so you go
back two 300 years ago um even further
and oftentimes the architect and the
original stonemason who would plant the
Keystone would not be alive to see this
Cathedral or or mosque fully built
that's Cathedral thinking it's doing
things whose whose fruits you will not
be around
to to take advantage of to to to to reap
and and to have as part of your life and
uh and I love it and I love the notion
of Cathedral thinking um just the the
visual there or mosque thinking I went
to the Blue
Mosque yeah yeah like I mean I've seen
some amazing architecture I love
architecture and I was like okay like
it'll be a beautiful building and I was
like
wow that wo that wo that you felt is
what we call a yeah and that sense of
awe at what they built is what I am
advocating for us to build in the world
today is so that when our descendants
look back and they say what what did Ari
what did Andy do they have a it's not
because we necessarily built Cathedrals
it's because we we took actions both
very small and very large to ensure that
they would flourish that they would have
those carab trees and I think what um
what I realize is that
I don't know who built the Blue Mosque
specifically I don't know who the
architect was I should you know and even
you know last earlier this year we were
in Sydney I went to Sydney Opera house
we did a live there it's a beautiful
building I learned they had been built
over a very long period of time I can
tell you that the architect was Danish
but I can't remember his name so part of
what we're talking about here
is giving up um our need for attribution
yep giving up our need for credit and
gosh this is the opposite of social
media right social media it's all about
getting credit you know um and yet in
science where people care a lot about
credit while they're alive and and my
scientist colleagues hate this but they
know it deeply too it's also the
business model of academic science right
now right right which is that with the
exception of
Einstein and a few others most people
will not be associated with their
incredible discoveries even the textbook
discovery 20 years out and I know this
cuz my dad's a scientist and I know a
lot about the scientists that were ahead
of him and he taught me this early on he
just said you know with rare exception
you know the discoveries are not um you
know no one's going to say oh that's the
discovery of soand so they talk about
the discovery people will build on it so
you're part of a process for which you
won't get credit in the long run you
will get credit in the short run and and
that brings me around to perhaps a point
that's more relevant to everybody not
not just scientists which is that we are
all trained to work on these short-term
contingencies reward schedules where you
know we achieve something we get credit
you get an A you get a B you get a
trophy we just came from the Olympic
track and field trials in uh in Oregon
it's like you know Podium you know
bronze silver gold and
um and so yes you're part of a larger
Legacy You're Building toward a larger
Legacy in the examples that you give but
part of it is understanding that um
you're not going to get credit you're
not gonna have your name huge on the
side of a building I mean I don't want
to give too many examples but I work at
a university for which there's an
endowment the size of a of a country
right we're very blessed to have that
endowment the buildings have names on
the side of them then the reason they
have names on the side of them is
because people gave money typically gave
money to the university to have their
name on the side of a building to be
immortalized what's interesting be for
many reasons both sociopolitical but
also other reasons those names change
over time so if if people knew that they
that they if they gave half their wealth
um and their name might be scraped off a
building in in 200 years they might feel
differently about it so short-term
contingencies are important then again
we call it Rockefeller Plaza y right um
it's it's Lincoln Center named after a
Lincoln yeah Pro yeah sure it is you're
the New Yorker you know um and so on and
so forth so so like if people um how do
we get the everyday person and I
consider myself an everyday person how
how do we get ourselves working on
short-term contingencies for a future
that we can visualize as better for the
next generation and let go of our need
for credit great series of of points and
questions brought up so part of what
you're talking about is egoic Legacy
right so you mentioned a building we
won't you it could be at any any
building at any major university the
name is put there on marble you said 200
years you went to Berkeley you went to a
bunch of places but um he bounced around
folks proof that you can bounce around
and still be successful but maybe you
should eventually finish we'll talk
about that later but Sprout Plaza yes
Sprout Plaza see to the Free Speech
movement although now you could argue
not so free speech movement that's my I
said that yes I said that Sprout Plaza
like I can't tell you who Sproul was do
you know who spra was no exactly I can
tell you the Arches I can tell you that
it was a free speech movement I can tell
you that I saw certain bands play there
I can tell you that it's supposed to be
a place where you can say anything and
be exempt from you know um being put in
jail basically anything maybe that's
still true but I don't think it is um
but I can't tell you who sprawl is the
question of legacy is very important so
Sprout
Plaza let's say 250 years from now that
name will probably it may may not be
there the plaza but PE the name will
maybe it was renamed by someone else um
so for Titans of Industry that can put
down several million dollars and put
their name on the side of a building
that's that's one form of Legacy that is
not the every every
person that being said if you know I I
have three children so let's say they
continue on at 2.2 children or whatever
you know my descendants in 250 years
Sprout Plaza may or may not still be
called that but in 250 years I will have
roughly 50,000 descendants that's a
scary from my wife I know it's an
exciting thought it's an exciting it's a
scary thought so what what is going to
impact the future and by the way if you
want to keep giving money to put your
name on the side of buildings please do
so oh yeah no please do that please do
so please please do that I should just
be very clear philanthropy at
universities and elsewhere people think
of it as like oh people egoic Legacy
sure also pays for hundreds of thousands
of scholarships the opportunity for
people and research and you need to do
it 100% it's vital it's vital it's vital
but for the everyday person like you or
or me if if I if if if I want to impact
the future with which I do cuz remember
I'm I'm not the kind of futurist where
I'm going to I don't I don't predict the
future my job at this point in time I'm
manifested in this biological entity
called Ari wallik is not to predict the
future it's to help folks make better
decisions today so that we have better
Futures in the in the near-term the
medium-term and the far off tomorrows so
what's going to impact those 50,000
wallet descendants is not going to be
anything that did egoic in terms of
getting recognition what's going to
impact them and and we know this in many
ways from across multiple disciplines
what's going to impact
them is going to be how I am with my
children and my wife and my partner and
the behaviors that I model because those
become those become the memes right like
we Susan Blackmore has meme theory right
not not internet memes where you know I
watch a lot of those but true memes
these Cal units that we hand off both
laterally and and and and forward you
know to longitudinally to other
Generations especially those closest to
us if you want to impact the future
there's a bunch of things you can do
right reduce your carbon footprint give
money vote this I want all of those to
happen in a positive way but at the end
of the day it's monkey see monkey do how
you and I interact right now will
obviously impact our relationship
everyone who's listening or viewing but
then everyone who's listening and
viewing how they are with the person who
hands them the coffee the Barista or
they are with their partner how they
model those behaviors is going to impact
the future in a greater way I will argue
than most of the ways we egoic think
about having a legacy I totally agree
and I I think um you know I'm old enough
and frankly I'm excited to be old enough
that like I can make statements about
being old enough to know that like I
believe that our species is for the most
part benevolent I feel like most most
people if raised in a um low trauma
environment um with adequate resources
will behave really well there are
exceptions and there may be sociopaths
that are born with really disrupted
neural circuitry that they just have to
do evil or feel you know but I think um
it's clear that trauma um and challenge
can can rewire behavior and certainly
brain um to create you know what we see
as evil right so but I think most people
are good yeah um most people are are of
genuine goodness um and I do think that
we Model Behavior I think that etiquette
is something that I guess as a 49y old
person I guess does that make me middle
age I'm of middle age I'll probably live
hopefully to be about a 100 but we'll
see bullet Buster cancer I'm going to
give it give it what I got depends on
whether or not you read your book fully
right that that there's a response to
that um that could go either way um the
I like to think that reading the book
fully will extend life as opposed to
shorten life yes but um if nothing else
maybe it'll cure insomnia the um the the
idea here is
that if
we're going to invest in in being our
best selves one would hope that other
people will respond to that the way that
you said you know that that we'll kind
of mirror each other good behavior
breeds good behavior in my life time
I've seen a real um increase in the
number of rules and regulations and a
decrease in Etiquette like and what I
would call and I don't this isn't a real
term I don't think but like spontaneous
etiquette or Genuine etiquette like
people being kind just to be kind not
because they're afraid of a
consequence um and I have a theory um
and I'll go through this quickly I I saw
a documentary recently about the history
of game shows where I learned that the
first commercial was during the World
Series where when de was making a run on
the home run record so they used a
sports game that was televised and on
the radio to have a first commercial
then they had game shows which were
basically commercials for the products
that's what they were and they used
human interaction as a way to make it
more interesting between the contestants
and the host and then came reality TV
shows and then now I would argue that
social media is the reality TV show and
we're all able to opt in and cast
ourselves in it and that the way that
people get more um let's just say
presence on the show is to do things
that are more hyperbolic yeah more
outlandish like the like it's very hard
I've tried and I think managed to some
extent to do so to it's very hard to
create a very very popular social media
channel in this reality TV show that we
are all in on social media by just being
super nice to everybody um and being you
can but it's much harder than if you
you're a high friction uh player because
it's less interesting there's less drama
um it takes more attention but I do
think that there are pockets of that so
Lex Freedman used to talk about this
like is there a social media platform
where people are rewarded for being
benevolent for modeling good etiquette
because they genuinely like that and um
I say social media because I think so
much of life now is taking place there
and that's the opportunity to reach
people across continents and and Far
Away um in time as as well right to
timestamp down things so here's my
question is there a version of social
media that is not just on the halflife
of like 12 hours what was tweeted Etc
what was retweeted because I would argue
that and even the highest
uh virality social media posts have a
halflife of about six months to a year
it maybe not even that there are a few
memes like the guy looking at the other
girl walking the other way those kinds
of memes that seem to persist but most
of them don't
um so is there a time capsule sort of uh
version of social media because I look
on the internet like on YouTube and I
would say there probably three or four
YouTube videos namely the Steve Jobs
commencement speech at Stanford in 2015
maybe last lecture by Randy P before he
died of pancreatic cancer maybe Ben
Brown's Ted Talk on vulnerability I'm
thinking mainly in the self-help space
personal development space here and
frankly aside from that and a
um most things as popular as they may
seem 100 million views 200 million views
compared to literature compared to music
compared to poetry compared to visual
arts it's G to be gone right I like to
think that these podcast episodes are
going to project forward 30 40 years
into the future but if we look at the
history of what's on YouTube and we look
at the halflife of any social media post
it may not be the case in fact it's very
likely it's not the case one would hope
that they morph into something that
lasts but the question here is is there
a version of social media that acts as a
time capsule to teach the sorts of
principles that you're talking about in
the show that I just did a brief history
of the future one of one of the places I
visit um are these caves in the south of
Spain 300t below the surface that are
extremely rare because what these cave
have in them side by side are both kind
of hand paintings done by both
neanderthals and Homo sapiens it's one
of the few places where they exist side
by side so before we talk about social
media we have to talk about the the the
what that really is is storytelling and
we're trying to in social media as we
know it right now we're trying to tell
the world a story about who we are and
what I stand for why am I here and why
do I matter and notice me my life meant
something but we go back to that cave
that I stood in where those drawings
were from you know 40 50,000 years ago
it was these are the animals that are
here here's when they come by this is
going back to the very beginning of our
conversation this is a time of year you
should expect to see these animals in
this area right and it was what what
Nancy bardaki calls Horticultural time
versus mechanical time so when you
because that's the way we used to think
from from 40,000 years to the
Agricultural Revolution 12,000 10 12,000
years ago to probably up until a couple
hundred years ago we didn't remember the
minute hand only existed on the analog
clock starting about 200 years ago we
just yeah we didn't we didn't think in
minutes we barely thought look the the
clock as we know it the mechanical clock
as we know it only comes about during
the Industrial Revolution and especially
then when we start to have trains
remember the train count sundal then it
was it was Stonehedge it was Sundial
those Seasons right the way we would
think about the future by the way when
people say oh AR you're you're a future
fut like this is people like you have
always existed now the idea of the
future that is this thing out there
that's going to Roy over us is
relatively new because up until a couple
hundred years ago Ari and Andy we did
exactly what our probably what our
fathers did and our kids would do
exactly what we did there was no kind of
evolution in in social structure but at
the Advent as we asess it could be argu
I've done a lot of things that my father
did he was a scientist and their other
domains of life but yeah goes back to
modeling Behavior right the the the
number one predictor if someone's going
to read the newspaper is if their
parents read the newspaper yeah some my
D who said he'd open the paper and poke
it from behind when I wanted his
attention well we can talk about that in
a second um the the the attention part
and
so when I look when I look at when I
start answering your question about
social media I look at it as an
anthropologist from Mars that's how I go
into every situation I want to say why
is it that we're doing what we're doing
how did that come about and how might we
learn from that so that we can
potentially go in a different direction
I if we choose all of Storytelling is
really a way of doing cultural
transmission of memes of ideas of ways
of being so that we can flourish and
move forward as a
species so then if you take that at its
at its at its truth what is social media
right now but nothing but a kind of a
Hall of Mirrors of our culture right now
what will they say 200 years from now
when they look at these posts with with
the likes and things that um the metrics
that we use to judge ourselves
individually and say what what happened
to this species I'd like to take a brief
break to thank one of our sponsors
element element is an electrolyte drink
that has everything you need and nothing
you don't that means the electrolytes
sodium magnesium and pottassium in the
correct ratios but no sugar now I and
others on the podcast have talked a lot
about the critical importance of
hydration for proper brain and bodily
function research shows that even a
slight degree of dehydration can really
diminish cognitive and physical
performance it's also important that you
get adequate electrolytes in order for
your body and brain to function at their
best the electrolytes sodium magnesium
and potassium are critical for the
functioning of all the cells in your
body especially your neurons or nerve
cells to make sure that I'm getting
proper amounts of hydration and
electrolytes I dissolve one packet of
element in about 16 to 32 ounces of
water when I wake up in the morning and
I drink that basically first thing in
the morning I also drink element
dissolved in water during any kind of
physical exercise I'm doing especially
on hot days if I'm sweating a lot and
losing water and electrolytes if you'd
like to try element you can go to drink
element.com huberman spelled drink
lnt.com
huberman to claim a free element sample
pack with the purchase of any element
drink mix again that's drink element.com
huberman to claim a free sample pack I
mean one of the reasons I fell in love
with Biology is
that yes we are evolving as a species
but I would argue slowly enough that any
fundamental knowledge about
biology of the human
body is a it's a core truth about us way
back when and now and very likely into
the future and of course technologies
will modify that medicine will modify
our biology Etc but it there I get great
peace from that um and most of the
so-call protocols I describ on the
podcast about viewing sunlight Etc
circadian rhythmicity Etc has been core
to our our biology and our
well-being 100,000 years ago and very
likely it will be quarter our biology
100,000 years from
now I therefore worry about any
technology
that shortens up our um time scale of um
motivation and reward and I use social
media so I am not antisocial media by
any stretch in fact I'm quite Pro
provided it's kept in check
all of Jonathan Height's uh ideas I I
really like those um but let me put it
this way if I go to Los Vegas which I do
enjoy doing from time to time I'm not a
gambling addict I guess if I say that
enough times people are going to say I'm
a gambling ad but I enjoy playing a
little bit of roulette or a little bit
the slots I play all the lowlevel stuff
that doesn't require any thinking um and
I often do pretty well for whatever
reason um because I know when to leave
probably um but Vegas is all about
short-term thinking and short-term
reward contingency it's actually
designed in every respect to get you for
to forget that there are these other
longer time scales and that's why
there's no natural light in most casinos
lights there's no clocks in many of them
um the uh the intermittent random
intermittent reward schedule that there
is designed to keep you playing um and I
would argue that a lot of social media
is like that yeah not all of it but a
lot of it is like that um reward likes
and responses in some cases fighting is
what people want they want to fight
because they like that emotion that it
will the algorithms figure you out so
that they shorten up your your temporal
window yeah and so when people say oh
we're walking around with a little slot
machine in our pocket all day long with
our smartphone I actually think that's
right I think it's right it's more like
a casino however where that casino
Harbors all sorts of different games and
they're going to find the one that you
like some people like playing roulette I
happen to like playing roulette some
people like crap some people like poker
some people like to bet on a game where
you get to sit the whole game with the
possibility of winning a friend of mine
who's actually an addiction counselor he
said you know the gambling addiction is
the absolute worst of all the addictions
why because the next time really could
change everything unlike alcoholism or
drug addiction or other forms of
addiction where the next time is just
going to take you further down in
gambling there is the realistic
possibility that the next time could
change everything and that destroys
lives so if we are walking around with a
sort of Casino in our pocket how do we
get out of that mindset much less use
that tool in order to get into these
longer term investments for the future
this is what I want to know how do we
get into the metaphorical uh you know
cave painting scenario because this what
it means is that the stories that I'm
seeing on social media today probably
are meaningless toward my future
probably more than likely yes but I need
to be informed but you know I saw the
debates like how much more do I need to
hear about what was happening at the
debates from other people
probably zero like there's no new
information there the only thing that
can happen is I can get caught in the
little Eddy of the tide poool that uh is
the the argu the debate about the debate
or the debate about the debate about the
debate so I mean it takes a strong
strong mind
to divorce oneself from all of that much
less get into this longer term thinking
and maybe this is why David Goggins is
always outrunning and hates social media
so much even though he's you know used
it to good end to to share his message
um I
mean what is it that we can do to
disengage from that short-term
contingency reward mindset and behaviors
and what in the world can we do instead
yep is it go paint like on the side of a
cave is it write a book is it um I mean
how do we how do we do that and and
let's check off the box of like we need
to tend our kids we need to tend to our
health we need to get our sleep we need
to get our let's just assume that we're
taking care of the the fundamentals of
health and
well-being which doesn't leave a whole
lot time afterwards anyway what do we do
like like what where where are the story
where should the stories go where do we
put them I I'm I feel really um
impassioned by this because you know I
devote my life to to this right and I
teach biology because I believe it's
fundamental and transcends
time but I care about the future and and
I'm well aware that you know in 30 years
the idea that there was a guy on the
internet talking about the importance of
getting morning sunlight sure that might
happen you know but probably no one will
will care just like I realized about
halfway through my scientific career
that sure I was tenured at Stanford won
some awards enjoyed the research enjoyed
the day-to-day but I realized okay
there's some I feel good about the the
research contributions we made but that
I
knew that people weren't going to be
like oh huberman discovered this because
I had already forgotten the people 32
years ahead and I know the literature
really well so like how how do you how
do you square these different these
different mental frames it's I it's it's
it's a conundrum well this is a
fundamental question of our time is what
is the purpose of our species being here
on Earth and for thousands of years that
was answered by religion the idea about
who we are and why we are here more
often than not was answered in the
afterlife but that Along Came our
friend rationality and logic and and and
the Renaissance and the Enlightenment
and as nii said I'll give you the full
quote God is dead and now we're
basically screwed but I don't believe
that I mean I believe in God I mean I've
I've gone on record saying that before
so and there are many people who believe
in God in the afterlife but it's still
is difficult to navigate the day to-day
well because I want to separate out what
what scientific rationality and the
scientific method did is it didn't
actually kill God what it actually did
was it killed the structures that arose
to intermediate between us and God aka
the church and this is not a
conversation about theology this is a
conversation about structures and about
power so science destroyed religion 100%
it destroyed the stories that religion
told us about our large purpose because
what ended up happening look often times
folks will say well you know science
destroyed destroyed God and destroyed
religion because it told us where we
came from we didn't we're not coming
from seven days right where where God
spun the Earth and created the heavens
in seven days I think we're at a point
now where we're starting to realize that
science actually tells us going back
13.7 billion years ago to the Big Bang
we can quibble with that number up to
today science is told has is telling us
how we got to this point what science
cannot do and what technology cannot do
is tell us where we should be
going and so what I'm not and I'm not
saying God should be telling what we
should be doing or or spirituality what
I'm saying is you're not going to you're
not going to argue you can tell God God
what to tell us no I'm not going to
argue but wait but but the but the term
you just said that that Science and
Technology cannot tell us where we need
to go no look here we started off by we
started off so the work that I do this
this mindset that I am advocating for I
call long path long path sits on three
pillars these are the kind of the to use
your nomenclature there three protocols
one transgenerational empathy empathy
with yourself empathy with the past and
then and then empathy with the future
you need those three the second pillar
is Futures thinking you'll notice it's
future with an S as opposed to the
singular future because we often think
of the future as a noun the sing that's
out there as opposed to what the future
really is which is a verb it's something
that we do then the final pillar the one
that is the most difficult for us to
wrap our head around is this idea of
Telos ultimate aim ultimate goal what
are we here for so we all suffer from
what I call a lifespan bias so the most
important unit of time to Andrew
huberman is from your birth to your
death we're all wired that way because
that's the literature the science that I
grew up with I I grew up and I want to
be a geneticist right that's where I
started what the literature tells us
about us as a biological entity is that
the most important unit of time is from
my birth to my death but the reality is
for our species and it has been going
back hundreds of thousands years is that
these things actually
overlap I come from my parents then I am
here and now my children these are not
distinct units there's massive overlaps
in terms of the culture the the
emotional the psychology of what I got
from them what I'm giving to my kids but
what ends up happening in a lifespan
biased Society the one that we exist in
right now is we have lost the Telos we
have lost the ultimate aim or goal or
purpose for our species for our
civilization on on this planet I'm not
going to tell you what that is what I am
going to say is when you don't have that
because God is no longer in the picture
religion is no longer in the picture we
flounder about and we're looking for
metrics to judge am I doing the right
thing
do I matter will people know who I am
200 years from now will my is is my
sense of purpose connected to anything
larger and without these larger
religious structures that we had for
thousands of years the answer is
no but there are still many people on
the planet who believe in God and are
religious yes right so more than there
are that are religious so does that mean
that they're immune from this like like
confusion not well no because there's
other confusions that come from it right
there's other religion as its practice
in majority parts of the world and this
is where I'm going to get a lot of hate
mail is mostly about power and
coersion and control not at its Essence
not I would say that for every major
religion yes I would say for every
religion like the the essence of it is
is is about love the essence is about
love and emancipation from The Human
Condition to connect to something larger
to connect to the Divine the problem is
when the business models get in the way
right right like with anything like with
anything and so that's true of science
too I mean I know a lot about the
business model you referenced it earlier
right science it's it's no longer uh
like you know pure medich type science
where you're doing these things and like
it's it's published it's Parish there's
business models can can we take it from
the lab to the can we 100% And that is
part of where we are what I'm asking for
when we have a conversation about ours
is to rise up out of this current moment
and say most mammals kind of have about
a million years that they exist on Earth
from from kind of when they rise up to
when they go extinct we're we're in the
first third of this ball game right
that's reassuring yeah we're in the
because I keep hearing about you know
the fact that we're almost so we're
about a third of the way through we're
the bottom we're in the bottom of the
third in oh goodness yeah all right well
well you finally said something that
gives me I'm just kidding lots of things
that you've said um give me confidence
in our future most notably that you're
talking about this sorry to interrupt
but I'm going to compliment you so maybe
I'll stop talking now
um that most notably that um you know I
think you're the first person outside of
um the subbranch of Neuroscience which
is a very small subbranch people that
study time perception to really Call to
um to people's Consciousness that the
human brain can expand or contract its
time perception and we do this all day
long and high sence high stress High
excitement um life and thinking shrinks
the aperture right it contracts the
aperture and makes us very good at
dealing with things in the present get
to the next day or the next hour
collapse go and continue repeat repeat
repeat it's it's the opposite of what
the Buddhists that traditionally said
which was to be present in order to see
uh the timelessness this is why I'm I'm
a big fan of the um I I forget the name
it's uh Rob we'll have to edit this in
the um um the otoma prayer which talks
about Release Me From the time-bound
nature of Consciousness to timelessness
sounds very mystical but what they're
really talking about is get me out of
the mode of stress into the mode of
relaxation that allows me to see how the
now links with the past and relates to
the Future impossible to do when we're
under stress trying to figure out like
how we're going to get someplace in
traffic to pick up the kids so they're
not waiting outside the school alone
impossible you you you just can't you
the two deep breath and the long exhale
like it works to bring your level of
autonomic arousal down make you navigate
that situation better but it is the
hyper rare individual who thinks well
look you know this is linked to some
larger time scale like when we are
stressed The Horizon gets right up close
so you're one of the first people to
talk about this Dynamic relationship
with that
Horizon is there a way that we
can Leverage The immediacy of our
experience that fact
to actually create useful tools for the
future like so for instance before we
started recording we're talking about
the notion of time capsules I've been
keeping a time capsule for a long time
the the first idea for this came when I
was a kid we used to build skateboard
ramps in the backyard and I'll never
forget that right before we put down the
first layer of plywood we put a time
capsule in there we all like wrote
little notes and did things I think um
someone put some candy in there or
something it's kind of a cool concept
right but
social media to me does not seem like a
time capsule I feel like it's just going
to get turned over turned over turned
over what are the real time capsules of
Human Experience so you said religion
religious Doctrine Bible Quran Torah
being the big three and there are others
of course but those are the big three
Bible Karan Torah those are big three
time capsules okay then we've got
literature
music poetry visual art so paintings
drawings and sculpture
what else do we have so let's let's
bring this down uh to the individual
like what what what I what my pract what
one of my practices is uh or I'll go
through a couple of them um and so so
one of them if if you come to my home
which hopefully you know you'll come
over been to your home yeah but you know
it's been a while it's been a while that
was a complaint that was a you know wait
I don't know if I haven't invited you or
you just I whatever we'll talk about it
afterwards whenever I make it to
Manhattan I have a hard time getting out
of Manhattan that's true um
so we have a Shelf with a bunch of
family photos and you know there's
photos of my
grandparents my parents myself my kids
and then to the right of that there's
actually and people are always like why
didn't you you know take care of this
there's always there's a blank photo
frame just blank those you know I have
three kids they're young but that blank
photo frame uh
represents my my grandkids or future
Generations it's something that I can
immediately see when I think about the
decisions that's why I said long path
there's a mindset there's all these
complicated things and it's also a
mantra so when I get into an argument
with my wife or or I have a conversation
with you or anything like that and I and
I immediately have the stimulus arousal
response where I want to act in the
short term but I actually me want to see
the bigger picture and again this is
highly self-referential I understand
that I'll just say long path I'll say
like what what are we really trying to
do here what is this actually all about
and that because I've been doing this
long enough brings me back so when I see
that third empty picture frame it always
reminds me that I'm here for this one
segment there was a segment before and
there's a segment coming after me and so
how I am in my daily interactions is
going to impact that how far so just a
few questions more specifically about
you because I think what you're doing
here is you're concretizing a process a
protocol if you will that anyone can use
and I I would argue that the shift from
printed photos
largely from printed photos to
electronic photos has made this
problematic you know um I mean it's made
certain things simpler like if you
change relationships you can just delete
a folder as opposed to having to
actually take photographs from a
previous relationship and make sure
they're none around in case your next
relationship would understandably take
issue with that I'm not speaking from
experience here um but how far back do
your photos go it's interesting the the
the the photos of my grandparents who
both perished in the Holocaust were
saved by my father who was in World War
III fought with the Jewish underground
made his way through Europe to Cuba to
Mexico where he eventually met my mom
and I was born um the photos that we
have he had kept in his wallet for
several decades and and he had them kind
of reconstructed and turned in that's as
far back as we go so grandparents yeah
okay and then you're married you have
three kids um and then you have this
this empty photo frame empty photo frame
and um you're same age as me your 50 or
49 49 49 thank you uh but you seem to be
in good health yes um and seemingly
young right yeah you have energy you've
always had a lot of energy you used to
you used to call yourself Ari Ferrari
you said you're like a Ferrari that's
why they I don't think this know each
other since we were little kids um he's
always had a ton of energy actually he
hurt himself when he was younger and he
was in full traction like cast of his
whole lower body and he would dance on
the floor on his arms kind of like David
Goggins will treadmill um on his hands
even when he can't move his legs okay so
chances are you'll meet your grandkids
hopefully yeah God willing you'll meet
your grandkids um
and but probably not your great
grandkids probably not okay well I have
a different tool but let me say
something I will not probably meet them
biologically like in in the sense that
this this big lump of cells will
probably not meet my great-grandchildren
but we will meet them I'm 100% sure of
is the way that I've modeled being in
the world to Partners be they my wife my
children business colleagues that
modeling my kids will be in the room
sometimes when I'm on work calls right
you know nothing confidential and they
you know they'll hear they'll hear in
the background they'll hear how I
interact how I am in the current human
moment they are learning they are
receiving that is how I'm going to meet
my great-grandkids that's how I will be
in the room with them how I have been is
going to impact 30 or 40 Generations out
that that 50,000 descendants that I
talked about earlier 250 years from now
I will meet them I will be with them
they may not know my name who I am but
hopefully the way they treat a stranger
or they interact with their Partners um
comes about how I did it that modeled
behavior that transmission yeah I get it
and um it's interesting because I think
that well and you're on the internet
so people will see you on the internet
probably at at least you know I think 30
50 years out if you Google your name or
whatever it's called at that point
Googling you know I get in trouble when
I say Googling people go why don't you
talk about difference because that's the
one everyone uses yeah unless you use
Duck Duck Go because you're afraid what
people so um when someone comes up with
a like a truly better one maybe it'll
get replace but meanwhile Google um so
they'll get to your great grandkids
could possibly know you there they could
hear this conversation yeah this very
conversation I think that's part of the
reason why people go on social media not
just to be consumers but they want they
want to leave something they're probably
not thinking about it consciously but
they want to leave something for the
future I use a tool um that I learned
from a friend he has this um your life
in in
uh your life in weeks I think it's
called and it's this you know you
fill-in chart where you you put your
birthday you put your predicted lifespan
so for me I put a 100 it feels good to
me I'm not interested in living much
past 100 unless there's some technology
that would allow me to do that with a
lot of vigor and my friends would be
around so and you mark off the the that
you fill in these little squares and um
I did this morning actually and you know
I'm not quite halfway through but I'm
about halfway through and it it's a it's
an interesting thing to see your life in
that
representation you go oh wow it can
inspire better decision- making because
we can lose track of where we are in
time and some of us including me are not
very good at tracking time
people that have ever waited for me on
an appointment know this I don't I track
I'm very oriented in space not well
oriented in time so
um the the problem with these charts is
that or photos on the Shelf I would
argue um is they have great utility but
the problem is that they're not in the
Forefront of our
Consciousness throughout the day right
like I filled out that chart I didn't
even think about it again until now and
when we are pressed with a decision in
some cases we have the opportunity to
step back and say okay look in the
bigger Arc of things I got to go left
here even though I want to go right this
is the the right thing for my bigger
picture the bigger picture bigger pict
path yes so you know is there a way is
there maybe a technology that actually
serves us to Anchor us to best
decision-making um for a given uh best
time bin we would call it in
Neuroscience best time binning mode of
time binning for a given decision I
think you need ask yourself a question
when when you're facing a you know not
should I have turkey or chicken for
lunch but maybe a slightly or maybe that
question too just ask yourself am I
being a great
ancestor what will allow me to be a
great ancestor how will descendants look
back on this decision go left or right
that's going to elevate you look I
talked about that you talked about you
know deleting photos and and stuff like
that so I'll tell you about the work one
of my on my Advisory Board is a guy
named Hal herfield smart great guy to
UCLA um who does a lot of future you
work and so what he did was and I'll do
the short version of this like a bunch
of people into an fmri functional MRI to
see kind of where the flow is and he
asked them he did a series of questions
where it's like think about yourself
right now and one part of your brain lit
up and then he goes okay I want you to
think about this celebrity I think he
used Matt Damon and L Lee Portman and
another part of their brain lit up and
he said I want you to think about
yourself 10 years from now and guess
what the part of the brain that lit up
for the celebrities Natalie and Matt was
the same part that Lit Up When thinking
about you 10 years from now so you had a
vague idea of who future Ari was but you
weren't totally connected to them right
it was like a stranger to you pulled
them out one group did nothing another
group he took a photo of them and he you
know took a photo ages them and then
puts them into a 3D you know uh virtual
reality and you're in a room and at one
point you don't know this is going to
happen as you walk across the room you
see a mirror and you look at yourself in
the mirror and it's a photo of you but
age 10 years so you're seeing an older
version of you yikes so I mean and cool
very cool does this intervention pulls
them out brings them back I think two
weeks later and he h he has them
hypothetically put money away for
savings account you know exactly what
happens the people who saw a version of
their age self put more money away for a
future retirement account than the folks
that didn't so the question is not only
are we discount connected from the
future my you know my future descendants
I'm disconnected from My Future Self so
what I've done and you you you'll see
this in the show it's it's it's scary
CLE look just like my dad and you'll
always look like your dad when you do
this is even though look a lot like my
mom we've been we've been bagging on
social media you you can go on Snap or
other places where that'll AG you right
it'll make you look 10 15 years older
and you can send it to your partner
everybody laughs so I I I took a
screenshot and I everybody laughs as
opposed to saying you great no no no
everyone's like oh my God and so so I I
once I read about this house research
many years ago I printed that out you
know my little home printer cut it out
and it's on my bathroom mirror and every
day I spend two or three seconds staring
at Future older Ari in his 70s that's
how I make better decisions today and
those better decisions aren't just about
putting money for retirement it's about
also how do I take care you know do I
floss or not you know you you get end of
of the night you want to just brush your
teeth and go to bed huh no you need to
floss at night you need to floss at
night we did an episode on noral health
and I learned from the from the dentist
the most important the most important
way to take care of future self is
flossing by the way just to be clear
I've learned this from many people um
he's it's actually true it's so key for
brain and body unbelievably key the
dentists are going to thank you but we
don't do it but if you look at your
mouth 20 years from now staring at you
as you're smiling with the older version
of Andy with you you know a little bit
less hair a little bit more wrinkles um
you're going to do it this is what howw
work has showed so that's another thing
that I've done is just look at that look
at that image of future you and and
connect with it um that's about having
compassion for yourself that's part of
this kind of
transgenerational uh empathy component
the one thing I want to Circle back on
because we could we could quickly fly
past it is this idea of Futures thinking
versus the the singular future yeah I
definitely want to touch on that can I
just ask you a question real quickly
before here of course this notion of of
um let's say a protocol for imagining
future self or actually visualizing
future self not as a way to scare
yourself into better health habits
although if it works great but as a way
to um you know really get your mind into
the reality that if you survive you're
going to get older by definition and
that person needs care and in an
environment and your kids are going to
grow up too we know this okay that's all
obvious um I feel like barring accident
or injury
or disease most people have a kind of
intuitive sense of how long they're
going to live and the reason I say this
is um you know I remember when Steve
Jobs was alive because I was a postto in
paloalto then and would see him
occasionally around paloalto um there
and then you know read the Walter
Isaacson biography about him and it
seemed like he had a very clear sense
that someday he would die and he lived
his life essentially according to that
principle and and in some sense may have
Justified being a little bit
outrageous at times and a little bit you
know High friction at times um through
this sense of urgency like it was
important to get things done and get
them done right and to discard with a
lot of kind of like popular convention
and he's kind of celebrated for it I'm
sure few people dislike him I think most
people celebrate him for it um I guess
he had some sense of how long he was
going to live and then at one point
maybe that sense was inflated and then
boom your dad died very when you were
very young do you think that that gave
you a perspective that
you know at any moment you could be four
months out you get the four month's
notice that you're going to be dead in
four months like like do it shape your
thinking about the about the future I
mean my dad's now I'm not not saying
this as a I mean no it's it's
interesting that there may been a
distinct advantage of course not to his
dying of course but to the idea that it
it really creates the sense of urgency
about not just the present but the
future I remember we were very young
you're like I want to have kids you got
going on a family like I think first
among all of us y really early and for
those whose parents you know are still
alive and and you know and seem to be
vigorous maybe they feel less of a sense
of urgency right which sounds wonderful
parents are alive vigorous okay that's a
blessing but if it prevents you from
living your life in a way that's really
linked to your your futures that's not
good so do you think that we have an
intuitive sense or or an unconscious
sense of how long we are likely to live
like a kind of a range cuz kind of
argued that in some of his writings and
speaking so look the let's talk about
death so it's my contention that one of
the things that keeps us from thinking
about the far future and acting and
behaving in a way that will will alter
it for the better is the fact that to
truly think and feel yourself into the
far future means that you're going to
have to think about a moment where you
no longer
exist 1972 Ernest Becker wrote a book
which you'll know all about the book
based on the title called the denial of
death he won the pillar surprise for it
and Becker's contention was that we the
only species that at a very early age
recognizes that we are only here for a
short period of time but more than
anything at one point in time we will
die we will cease to exist and it was
Becker's contention further that
everything religion culture uh laptops
convertibles everything that we create
is our way of pushing back the the very
understanding that at one point we will
cease to exist and it horrifies us I
could not agree more and I'm so so
grateful that you mention this book be
and this idea from Becker because I
would argue that every addiction every
single addiction is based in a fear of
death and an attempt to shorten the time
scale of thinking shorten the time scale
of rewards shorten the time scale of
everything to avoid that reality and
it's a reality that we learn of at a
very early age intuitive because we see
death around us more and more now in
America especially in the Western World
we push back from Death we do everything
we can to to to avoid even just even old
people that you know we we we put them
in old age homes it used to be we Liv
together right in these in these
multigenerational homes because older
people I would argue remind us of death
remind us of our own mortality and so
until we can reconcile ourselves truly
at an individual maybe even at a
collective level that we will cease to
exist it becomes extremely and is
extremely difficult to Future to Future
properly to Future in the way that I'm
advocating for which is about being a
great ancestor to Future descendants and
generations and so in the work that I've
done and in in the show that I did I did
something people were very confused like
you know the show about the future brief
history of the future everyone's like oh
you're going to go see all this cool
technology blah blah blah blah that's
part of what we do but in the middle of
the show in episode four I go to the
high mountain desert in we travel all
over the world but I go to the high
mountain desert outside of Tucson and I
sit with the Lua Arthur a death
duela and what she does you know you
know mostly the time when we think of a
doula we think of someone helping birth
a a child into the world what a death
Doula does is help us and help our loved
ones exit this world and she does
something extraordinary other cultures
some religions have this she does
something called a death meditation and
in the show I do it and then you you can
find these online where you literally go
through a medit a guided meditation
where you go from breathing to sensation
of breath to literally just becoming one
with the soil it's a very intense thing
to go through but I went through a
version of the death meditation as
you've alluded to when I was 18 years
old cuz I literally am the one who
picked up the phone from the hospital at
2 in the morning I was home from college
and I picked it up I didn't even I
didn't even say hello I picked up the
phone I said this is his son cuz who
else was calling it to in the morning
and it was a charge nurse and she goes I
want to bring you up to speed he Rel
late stage of cancer your father is not
responding we've been doing CPR there
are no orders on what to do what do you
want us to do so I made that call
because it was obvious of where it was
going that was my way of confronting the
salience of my of his mortality and my
own
mortality very very abruptly um other
people have their own early brushes with
death I would argue that there is a
certain level and you touched on this of
of emancipation when you've come close
you don't you don't want to wish it on
anyone but when you have come close to
seeing what that looks and feels like
you all of a sudden become free from the
burdens that society places on you in
the in the earnest bararan way of trying
to push back mortality because you no
longer give a because you've now
you now know where it's all going to go
and you've seen it um as a society in
the West in America we do the exact
opposite of that we inject things into
our body into our everything we can to
push it back because we want more
quantity but we don't think about the
quality of the life that we want now
that being said you go to Japan uh 90%
of the companies that are over a
thousand years old on planet Earth right
now are in Japan so part of it is our
culture part of it is different cultures
of how they think and respect elders and
death and they understand that we don't
need to exist within this own lifespan
bias but we're actually part of a chain
a great chain of being those who came
before the pros and cons of that the
baggage of that and then it's my role to
decide what I want to keep and what I
want to let go and then what I want to
transmit to the Next Generation that
larger purpose that larger Telos is
what's missing right now that I think we
need back in Western Society not just so
that we're grounded and happy that's yes
and more content but because we need to
be able to do that as we confront what
we do or do not do about climate change
what we do or do not do about synthetic
biology what we do or do not do about
artificial intelligence because right
now especially on the last two the
technology is telling us what to do and
we don't need more smartness we need
more wisdom and part of that wisdom is
going to come about by us integrating
the fact that you alluded to that at one
point we won't be here how do we do this
I mean like we can do it conceptually
like you want to set the stage for that
whoever ends up in that empty
frame um to have a better
life but it's it's hard to do like I
think most people assume once it's
lights out who knows what happens next
but it's very hard to get them working
for something that they
don't have the ability to imagine and
the people that they don't even know so
in other words if we have a hard enough
time imagining ourselves in the future
you gave us a tool look at the Aged
version of yourself I love that and if
there's a website that we'll do that we
can put a link to it the show note
captions put a reminder that you will
get older you are getting older in the
in this very moment and try and live for
that the well-being of that person and
the people around them and look at it so
that that creates a protocol for the
self how do we protocol the the future
setting um the Futures approach the
verbing of the future or into the future
for people around us and for people that
we don't even really know and that we
probably will never even meet great
question um before we go on that let's
let's double click on the on the
individual incentive so we talked about
the Aging photo that you can do uh
there's also another thing you can do
that's very powerful you touched on this
earlier which is writing a letter to
your future
self um so you know you can do this at
at longpath org you can find Future me
websit you have a you have a yeah yeah
it's the number one tool that we use so
when I when I give when I give talks I
give shockingly people have me come and
talk to large groups not shockingly come
on what what I say to them is you know
we'll kind of go through a version of a
different conversation like this um I'll
say now what I want you to do is I want
you to write a letter to your future
self it's going to be delivered in five
years from
now and I thought this was a common
practice because I've been doing it from
a very early age but apparently it's not
to write a letter to your future self
yeah I can't I mean maybe once or twice
we did it and so I'll let you in a
little secret the
the this is
um the change occurs not when you
receive the letter but when you actually
write it because you're actually
thinking in a way about future you in a
way that you normally don't which is
who's going to receive this letter where
do I want them to be um and what I find
more often than not is people come after
me come come up to me afterwards and I
go to write I'd never even thought who
do I want to be in five or 10 years like
what's that Arc of what I want to kind
of connect to what am I optimizing four
how do I make myself better in that way
so I want I want to make sure people
understand that if you can't look at a
photo of yourself age the very least
write a letter to your future self and
what does the letter include dear Andy
dear Ari and then whatever you want to
put in right this is a onetoone private
conversation with your future self what
are your hopes what are your dreams what
are your desires what are you afraid of
what do you want to see happen because
until you put out there uh you know you
can't be it if you can't see it right
you have to actually visualize what that
is and putting in not not the negative
but what you really want to see
aspirationally in that letter now starts
creating a a road map to getting there
because at the very at the very kind of
bottom of the Pyramid of what that road
map is is visualizing what that success
looks like right so I was um in high
school I ran
track and I started off by doing you
know the The 100 uh very kind of in in
individual Sport and then eventually um
as I went forward I started running the
4X 100 which is a relay race and what I
learned from my coach coach Ted tilan um
was that the 4X 100 it's very important
that all four runners run very very fast
obviously but where that race is one or
lost is in the transition zone is in the
passing of the Baton and so when you
write a letter to your future self yes
you're connecting to your future but
what it's really also helping you do is
realize that life is not a 100 yard dash
it's actually a relay and you're
carrying a bon that was handed to you
that you are now going to hand off and
I'm arguing that we right now what I
call we're in this intertial moment
between kind of what was and what will
be as a as a planetary
civilization we are in this transition
zone and what we do or do not do in this
intertitle in this transition zone with
the Baton that is homo sapen planetary
flourishing culture and um is going to
matter much more than we think it does
in the current moment of social media
pings so that that's that's touch it on
the individual let's go up to that
Collective we have to
decide as individuals which some of
these protocols will help you do but we
have to decide as a
society that we want to actually tackle
the question of to what end because in
the Erasure of God in the Erasure of the
afterlife in that in in what was given
to us by religion for hundred thousands
of years some sort of guarantee that we
would go on to heaven or hell now that
that is no longer there for a lot of
people for some it still is and it still
helps them make better decisions I would
argue in the day-to-day but for those
who no longer have that we have to
decide that and this can be from an
egoic level that the decisions that we
make or do not make are either going to
hook up in a great way future
Generations or or or not be we can be in
those three categories we can be one or
two it doesn't matter who cares I'm just
going to you know like YOLO or we can
say we want to be part of a much larger
project um I talk about this a lot like
the the kind of you can tell my bias
here like I don't say human like the
homo sapien project I think like I said
we're kind of at the bottom or the top
of the third we have at least several
hundred thousand more years to go I am
not as focused as to whether or not we
leave Earth and we go to Mars and we
become an Interstellar species I'm focus
on who we are cuz I've met like you I've
met Great Hearts and minds and I think
that as a
society if we take care of everyone's
basic needs if we look at kind of the
best of humanity the best of the humans
that we've met we can all rise to that
level so instead of there being like a
hundred great heroes in the world who
are just so heartfelt you know like the
dolly llama or or Mother Teresa or even
Einstein that that could actually be are
those three still in t they've been
canceled yet no they're still they're
still with us they're still with me with
me but look even when you get into their
look you asked one of the ways how how
do you build transgenerational empathy
with the past read people's biographies
especially autobiographies and you see
they had it really tough and they're not
as perfect and as saintly as we think
they are and those right and the
autobiographies are of course through
their own lens through their own l so
the biographies give you or or you read
their letters to their lovers or to
their Partners like this kind that
person's kind of an right like
but but at the end of the day if we as a
society want to find ourselves where
more of us than less of us are at this
heightened sense of kind of intellectual
and spiritual and emotional
activation that's not going to happen
overnight but if we say that's the goal
that we want we want to
see people will argue 9 billion 7 Bill
billion three billion whatever the
population of homos sapiens is on planet
over the next several centuries or
Millennia if we want to see them
flourishing in a way that's beyond what
science fiction has ever even showed us
if we make that decision that your life
what what Andy Andrew huberman is doing
his work when Ari walk is contributing
to that that gives you a sense of
purpose that I think religion used to
give us that we are now sorely lacking
in a social media uh world of instant
buying of crap that we don't need on the
internet yeah or that we do need and
it's just a shorter time scale reward
thing like I'm I don't believe that
everything that happens on social media
that we buy or the pleasure that we get
in our our lifespan or day is bad I
don't think you know I'm a capitalist
too what I what I think is that it's
just one it is but one time window of of
kind of operations just I just think
it's good to have flexibility right it's
sort of like in in nutrition they talk
about metabolic fle flexibility it's
it's all about balances about Harmony
how are we in harmony with with the
future that that that is that is what
I'm advocating for so I love it and I I
also know that a lot of people love it
even if they don't know they love it
meaning um they perhaps haven't heard it
framed the way that you describe it in
your book on your show and today but I
think a lot of people just are hoping
that the super high Achievers right the
Steve Jobs's the Elon the
um I don't know how people feel about
politicians nowadays but you know but
the people building Technologies who to
really care about the future I mean say
what you want about Elon but the guy is
building stuff for the now and for the
future y I mean he's doing it
um that they will take care of it for
next Generations right just like there
were those the Edison and the Einstein
and the you know the you have to be
careful with names these days because
almost everyone has something associate
with them where you're going to trigger
someone but I'll just be you know um
relaxed about it and say like would even
say like uh you know even like a Jane
Goodall like the appreciation of our
relationship with animals and what they
have to contribute to to our own
understanding of ourselves and our
planet that kind of thing so um you know
those people ushered in the the life
that I've had and um and I feel pretty
great about that um so many people are
probably saying okay make sense for my
family but you know what do I have to
contribute um and you gave the example
of the fact that children are always
observing they carry forward the
patterns and the and the traits um and
certainly the responses that they
observe in their parents what's okay
what's not okay you know starting in the
80s and in the 90s in this country there
were many more divorces in fractured
homes than uh there were
previously um as a consequence there's
also been a fracturing of the kind of
collective celebration of of holidays
like the things that have anchored us
through time are happening less
frequently now many of these have been
become commercialized but that was
always the case you know people were
getting Christmas presents one way or
another so
um you know do you think that the the
kind of fracturing of the family unit
has contributed to some of this lack of
of um let's just call it longer path um
thinking and decision- making look I I I
think it's the the fracturing of the
institutions that have been with us the
past several hundred years that is
leading
to uh an exponential rise in short-term
Behavior okay so you mentioned religion
uh maybe for a moment we could just talk
about universities yeah these days in
part because of the distrust of Science
and in part because of the distrust of
in government and in part because of the
distrust in traditional media um there's
more and more uh ideas being kicked
around
that you know formal education is not as
valuable as it used to be and people
always cite the examples of the Mark
Zuckerberg's and uh others who didn't
finish college but I would argue they
got in and chose to leave they took
leave of absence they didn't drop out
and they are rare individuals Ryan
holiday said it best I think if you are
struggling in college you're absolutely
the kind of person that needs to stay in
college um with rare exception unless
there's like a mental health issue or
some a physical health issue that needs
to be tended to because nowhere else in
life except perhaps the military is
there such a clear designated set of
steps that take you from um you know
point A to point B with a credential
that you can leverage in the real world
for for builds um and I completely agree
with that but I would also argue
that academic institutions and financial
institutions have changed political
institutions have changed and there's a
there's a deep distrust so we we are
having a harder time relying on them to
make good decisions I you saw a lot of
presidents of University major
universities fired recently
um including Stanford there I said it it
happened um but also Harvard and other
places for different reasons and and
fired might be not the correct term they
decide to resign whatever it was they're
no longer there they have new ones in um
and so there's a lot of
distrust so what can we rely on like if
it's not if if people are having less
faith in religion less faith in academic
institutions less faith in like what do
we got we got really good in academ at
least on the social sciences side of
saying what was wrong with the systems
but not about what the systems we wanted
them to be because going back several
hundred years ago coming you know
through the Enlighten especially well
Renaissance into the enlightenment the
enlightenment gave us back this idea of
a new meta narrative based on on on
rationality and logos and and the
ability to kind of understand the World
by breaking it down into its component
parts of that science um fast forward
several hundred years and we're at the
point now where we're really good at
saying what doesn't work but very very
bad about saying what does work and what
we do want because by saying what we do
want means that we have to put forth
some sort of meta narrative some thread
some official future that we can hang
ourselves on and it tells us a lot about
it's sort of like Declaration of values
it's one thing to say um which is scary
uh for a lot of people because it's one
thing to say that doesn't work that's no
good that's no good it's easy to be a
Critic what you're describing has
incredible par to what to health like
you know when I started the podcast and
even before when I was posting on social
media it was during the lockdowns and it
was like all this fear about everything
and I said listen like I I can't solve
this larger issue related to what may or
may not be going on but what's obvious
people are stressed stress is bad when
it's chronic people aren't sleeping
that's bad especially when it's chronic
and I've got some some potential
Solutions some tools some zero cost
tools so a lot of the the backbone of
the hubman Lab podcast is about the
things you do more so than the things
you don't do so what you're describing
is essentially a field that consists of
like breaking things down but isn't
offering Solutions so it sounds very
similar and I think that um people love
potential Solutions even if one
acknowledges look this might not solve
every sleep issue it very well could
make you know positive ground towards
some of it or make it 50% better 20%
better in some cases 100% better and of
course there are those For Whom the the
tools don't work and they need to go to
through more to more Extreme Measures
but um I hear you saying that religion
provided the solutions not just pointing
to problems people are not looking at
that as much anymore the uh big
institutions like AC academic
institutions political institutions
let's face it regardless of where one
sits on one side of the aisle or the
other they're constantly fighting it's
like 12- hour news cycle designed you
just point fingers so that nobody
actually has to say what they really
believe in a clear tangible way
there are those that do that a bit more
than others but it's it's a it's a mess
and then in terms of the family unit
this is what I was alluding to before I
feel like family units and values and
structures are becoming more rare at
least in the traditional view of the
family um let let let's remember two
parents kids Etc which is not by no
means a requirement to call something a
family but so like where so are you
saying that we all have to look as like
it obviously starts with the individual
but that every that part of the work of
being a human being now in going forward
is to learn this Futures approach we
have to be future conscious we but again
this goes back to the transgenerational
component we have to critically assess
where we came from and why we're at this
point so we talk let's talk about the
nuclear family let's um the idea that
your children would be quote unquote
sleep trained and put into another room
is relatively new that's from the
Victorian era right where you would put
your kids in another room because if you
go back to most indigenous cultures
everyone together and this happened for
thousands of years and the kids pile
yeah or in one big room or or in a long
house huh I don't know if they were like
piglets but they definitely all s
together look the the my and look
everyone can look I'm going to say this
in a non-judgmental way but it's going
to sound very judgmental I walk down the
street sometimes and I see kids in
strollers being pushed by a seemingly
healthy adult right the kid is detached
and they're in this kind of this buggy
which comes from 17 18th century England
but if you look at most cultures around
the world for thousands of years what
they did was they wore their babies for
what we call the fourth trimester
usually the mother so a bunch of
patriarchal reasons for that but they
literally would have a wrap on and the
baby would be wrapped and be held very
close to them this is the baby beorn
thing well the baby beorn you put the
baby on front of you but it's facing out
when you really wrap them with like a 20
yard WP it's skin to skin right and and
and look and there's a reason like like
everything there's a reason for
everything you know B for for a human
baby to come out of the mother as
cognitively intellectually and
physically ready as a baby chimpanzee
would take 18 months of gestation but we
only do nine you know why right we we do
it because our brains got so big because
of all that protein because of AR and
Andy were hunting together using our
prospection earlier on this story that
the baby has to come out at 9 months
because when we from walking on all
fours to being bipedal the female pelvis
closes and there's only so much room for
that baby to come out so they come out
early yeah the brain had completed
development internally the you'd have
only stillborn I mean presumably there
was a branch of our earlier version of
species that many mothers and and uh
babies died in child birth because of
this they were deselected but that's not
the we found we found the optimal
balance of 9 months roughly right but
what that means is the baby has to be
attached and close to the because it's
totally helpless um the point is that so
much of what we do we don't critically
examine so you're talking about you know
the breakdown of the family structure I
would argue that breakdown isn't
happening now that breakdown happened
when we decided to move from you know
tribes and clans of raising children and
move into a Victorian area mindset where
we we take the grandparent you know
there there's very few species on planet
Earth that after the female um goes
through menopause they still live
basically elephants whales and humans
right why because those are the species
where you need others Elders to help
care for the young because of the a for
mentioned early early uh birthing but
maybe it's also the the propagation of
of story as you said earlier that can
inform better decisions so we we need
stories wisdom is like spoken cave
paintings basically yeah and so we need
so those stories about what does it mean
to have a proper family structure as you
know whether it's a nuclear family of
four or five 20 of aunts and uncles and
around look we did pretty well for the
first couple hundred thousand years and
then there was all these things that
religion disrupted right taking the
children away from the mom these all
come from puritanical beliefs now we're
at this point in this intertitle moment
where we have to critically examine why
is it we do what we do what are the
things that we want to keep and what are
the things we want to let go of and how
do we move forward and your question was
well why do they want to do that what is
it what is it what's the incentive
structure and I'm arguing that the
incentive structure for us to do that
because because we actually care about
where we take our species where we move
forward in the universe given the fact
that so much had to go right to get us
to this point right I'm I'm often asked
this question you know um God how do we
how do we get so messed up and what is
it going to look like wait are are we so
messed up because you said we're about a
third of the way through our our things
are better than yeah so I get I get the
I get the question like how is it that
we messed up and I always say we didn't
mess up we're actually doing much better
look I I walk into my daughter's room
and I look at their bookshelf
15-year-old twin daughters and every
piece of fiction that takes place
somewhat in the future is dystopian all
the Futures they know are the Hunger
Games are the hund are the Maze Runner a
world that has gone bad um I understand
the we talked about this earlier that's
the negativity bias people going to be
attracted to reading about those things
kids read that stuff now oh my those are
the best sellers the best sellers are
all the these dystopian there's always a
love interest in a teenage thing but
it's always the backdrop is always
dystopia and we're attracted to that in
the same way we're attracted to a
dumpster fire because we want to see the
things that dystopias can act as
dystopian stories can act as an early
warning system if you keep doing this
one thing that you're doing and
extrapolate out a few decades it'll look
like this what we're missing and you
just you hit the nail on the head are
the stories about what if we get it
right what what we call protopia so you
know you Utopia is this perfect world
that always collapses on itself it's
really dystopia a size dystopia we
talked about is a terrible terrible
World a protopia this idea put forth by
Kevin Kelly is a better tomorrow not
perfect but one we're making progress so
it's unbelievably important and this is
how I'm answering your question from a
few minutes ago that we start setting
stories in protopia in better tomorrow
in tomorrows where not everything is
perfect but where we have made
significant progress now it won't be
perfect there'll still be divorces and
maybe murders and Mayhem but if we start
will say okay that all sounds great like
I I for one say you know that the shift
from the notion of building a better
future through self-sacrifice rather you
can make it a almost like pro- self and
others Endeavor the way you've described
it empathy for self empathy for others
getting some control over the um you
know contraction dilation of your time
window making sure that you know what
you you take good care of yourself but
you take care of the the future
Generations as well like for the that
empty frame the now empty frame um and
then moving from dystopia to protopia
that that all sounds great but I think a
lot of people might think okay well at
best I could do that for myself and the
people that um that I know it's going to
be hard to do that as as a greater good
for the greater good and you could say
well that does contribute to the greater
good this is actually very similar to
what we tell um graduate students when
they're uh they get their first round of
data you go okay well the data often
times not always but often times you you
say well the data are cool like if it
continues this way that' be an
interesting story and they get the sense
and you already have the sense because
you have the experience to know like the
best case scenario is is a nice solid
paper MH that your three reviewers and
maybe 20 other people will read and
you're going to spend the next five
years of your life on this thing maybe
three but probably five years of your
life and you'll get your PhD and there's
always this question like do you ditch
that project and go for something else
or do you stay with that project in
other words what you're saying is you
get to put your brick on the wall but
it's a brick whereas you know there are
other projects you go whoa like that's
you know that's like One Wing of the
cathedral and and it's a rare instance
where that happens and a lot of it's
luck and it's doesn't always work out
anyway but you know what we're saying
here is you know how hard people are
willing to work is often related to what
they feel the potential payoff will be
if they can sense the payoff and by the
way I love the protocols that you
offered the empty frame the journaling
to future self this notion of time
capsuling your your present thinking
into the future um the Aging of self
these are these are very actionable
things I plan to do them um and I think
they're very valuable but if I
understand correctly you are interested
in creating a movement of sorts um where
many if not everybody is thinking this
this way because the other model is okay
well the Elon will take care of it for
us and I'm um or the uh you know the or
the system's so broken and like there's
nothing I can do I'm just trying to make
ends meet so how does one create a like
a like a reward system or a social media
platform or you know how does one you
know join up with other people who are
trying to do this so the question you're
getting at is
in in a lot of the work that I've read
and listened to on this podcast often
times it's about how do we you know
obviously how do we how do we optimize
the self and I mean that in a good way
not in a selfish way um how do we make
ourselves better right that's where you
have to
start I'm advocating for for how do we
optimize Society how do we optimize
civilization and this is a clear case
where unlike when think of scale being
you know make more widgets at a cheaper
price this is really a one plus one plus
one plus one at Infinity so if at
infinum if we think about just for
example how many listeners and viewers
there are of this podcast Millions right
um and how many people they interact
with within their within their closest
sphere and you go out right so right now
that your listeners have the potential
to live and act long paath and in this
way where they're doing something for a
greater they're thinking about their
purpose in the world as nested within
the larger purpose of our species to to
allow for more mass flourishing in the
future uh for generations to come if you
think about your listeners and how they
interact and how they Model Behavior
your potenti and in their spheres you're
at 30 40 50 million people right that's
a very very large number um and what we
know about social emotional contagion is
that these things are contagious they
are memes this is Susan Blackmore's work
um that's how it scales it actually is
one of those things where you're not
going to you know just add powder um and
it all of a sudden will will create this
this optimal future for everyone because
only one person that does it like we all
have a role to play in it it's like
literally what what I would want is
anyone who's listening or watching this
uh when they're done it um take a few
minutes and think about what what kind
of Futures do I want for myself for my
family for the generations to come and
what is my role in that great play what
do I have to do and yes you need the
protocols to kind of bring you back into
there right for me it's easy because I
wrote the book I did the show I can just
think long path I can do it for others
this is going to be the first time
they're thinking about this or maybe
they've been thinking about it for years
even in their smallest interactions they
start doing it and we you know this is
this gets into kind of the Santa Fe
Institute and complexity Theory this
stuff starts to actually reverberate
that's how we do it you know there's not
we don't need to March for long-termism
right we don't we don't we don't need
bumper stickers thank you there will be
no bumper stickers there bumper stickers
there will be no bumper
stickers it's about placing our very
essence and our actions within the realm
of possibility for the Futures that we
want and our role in that and then the
purpose I don't care if you're a barista
if you're a surfing instructor if you're
a you know brilliant podcaster um
whatever it is that you do do it with
the intention and recognition that
you're modeling a way of being in the
world that has ramifications and
reverberations Beyond this current
moment I you said earlier well you know
who knows if anyone will listen to your
podcast what I can tell you with
certainty because I'm sure it's probably
already happened is a large language
model an llm some you know what we call
AI right now is already or it will at
some point ingest the hubman Lab podcast
yeah we have one we have a hubman lab AI
there you go we haven't advertise it
very heavily but it's there you can ask
me questions it's pretty good it sounds
a bit like me the jokes are dry they're
dry and not funny I say mostly funny but
you'll get I'll give you some more um
but eventually that will pull that will
percolate out so at the speed of things
are going three or four years from now
this very conversation how we're model
what what I learned in school discourse
ethics how we talk to one
another that is teaching these machines
how to think and act and who and what we
are and how to become the best of or the
worst of ourselves what we put out there
the kind of the public facing content is
going to become what these machines
think of as how they should be and we're
modeling it for for for them um and
going back to the higher education
example for a second I think higher
education like many institutions as as
AI what we call that fully comes online
is going to radically radically change
and it will be you know a Cambridge or
an Oxford tutor in everyone's ear and
higher education this idea that you kind
of come together um to receive
information will start to dissipate from
higher education but what higher
education will start to do and I think
what I need to focus on is not just the
intellectual and and and the cognitive
but also the psychological and the
emotional uh core of who you are and
helping you develop that well aen to
that uh you know there was a former
guest on this podcast uh or there was a
guest on this podcast previously uh Dr
Wendy Suzuki's professor at NYU I think
now she's the dean of of um Arts and
Sciences I think is the correct title
and you know she's trying to bring some
of her Laboratories data on the value of
even very brief meditations to Stress
Management in college first to kind of
to help students manage the stress that
is college and being in your early 20s
um but I think there's a larger theme
there which is to try and teach
emotional development to teach
self-regulation um because many people
don't get that I mean you know that or
they get it but then there are big gaps
um and I I love the way that you're
describing this basically it's it's a
it's a lens I if I if I may it's it's a
lens into Human Experience that's very
Dynamic um um and is really in concert
with the fact that the human brain has
the capacity for this dynamic repres
presentation of time like focus on like
solve for the now there will be parts of
your day no doubt today where you just
have to solve for the now you're not
thinking about the great or good um and
then the ability to dilate your your
Consciousness um in in the temporal
sense and and to solve for things that
are more longterm make these Investments
towards the future um I wonder though
you know how can we incentivize people
to be good to do good um and how can we
incentivize people to do this on a
backdrop of a lot of short-term carrots
and short-term Horizons um I think
you've given us some answers um and
they're very powerful ones such as the
Aging self image exercise um journaling
into the future writing to Future Self
the empty um frame the empty frame uh
exercise linking up with our ancestors
and thinking about where we're at now
and where we want to go is there
anything else that you want to add
meaning is there anything that we should
all be doing should we all be reading
more biography should we um if I look
back through history it's both dark and
light
um like what is there anything else that
you really encourage people to do to be
the best version of themselves for this
life and the the ones that come come
next I've touched on this we we we need
to
examine in ourselves why is it we do and
are the way that we are right do you
know why in this country we vote on
Tuesday I don't have any idea so most
advanced democracies vote over the
weekend or a couple of weekends in
America we vote on Tuesday because that
was the time that was necessary for
someone to leave church on Sunday ride
on Horseback into the big
city vote on Tuesday and ride back
before Market Day on Wednesday I'm so
glad you're going to tell me it's not
because um then can still watch Monday
Night Football no this is long before
Monday Night Football and so I think why
we vote on Tuesday um it's a metaphor
for so much of who we are and have
become as individuals and as a society
um I'm a big fan of cognitive behavioral
therapy of CBT I think partially because
what it does is it it has us look at
what of those what are those negative
stories that we tell ourselves but then
because you can't just say stop doing
something you can't just extinguish a
behavior you have to add and put in a
positive story
what I've tried to do with some of our
time here today and what I want people
to partially take away more than
partially to really take away and bring
in is examine the you know the why
Tuesdays what are those stories that
you've inherited some of them are going
to be
macrosocial like you are defined by this
Society by what you own by the badge on
your car that says how successful you
are that's a story it's a story that's
been fed to us there are other stories
are very personal these are stories that
can sometimes be very private and go
back Generations within a family and
then to understand some of those stories
serve us some of those stories don't
serve us but after Discerning that we
then have to write a new story we have
to write a new story for oursel who am I
why am I here isn't going to be answered
by a religion or a God or a book or a
podcast or a futurist it's going to be
answered
by looking and searching inside of
yourself
about how does you got here what really
matters and where you want to contribute
and help move us forward as a as a
species on spaceship earth you know as
not as not as a passenger but as crew on
this vessel and how we're going to move
forward so the
stories have served us well and they
have not served us well and to move
forward forward it's okay now to say I'm
going to write these stories that serve
me I'm going to see the future not as a
now not as this thing that I'm heading
towards or that's going to Tumble over
me but that I'm going to create and
those stories may be very in in in
intrapersonal they may be interpersonal
they may be political they may be
business they may be what you buy what
you consume but you have to have agency
you have to instill a sense of hope into
your own life and a sense of awe and a
sense of really just empathy for who you
are and where we are if we want to
collectively move forward into the
Futures that will allow our descendants
to look back on us and say they they
were great ancestors I love it and I
also um just want to highlight the
importance of
um recordkeeping of of putting things
down on paper or maybe in electronic
form creating time capsules for the
future Generations because I think a lot
of what people probably are thinking or
worried about a little bit is like okay
I can do all this stuff to try and make
things better and even give up the
desire for any kind of credit but um you
know not feeling like it will be of any
significance but what I've learned from
you today is that you know it starts
with the self and then it radiates out
to um the people we know and that maybe
we um cohabitate with but even if we
don't cohabitate with anybody it
radiates out from us and that it is
important to get a sort of Time Capsule
going so that um people can feel like
they have um some significance in the
future that they may not ever have
immediate experience of but to really
like send those ripples forward and get
the sense that those ripples are moving
forward so for that reason and
especially given the nature of this
podcast for the reason that you gave
these very concrete protocols if you
will um that we've highlighted in the in
the time stamps of course as tools as as
protocols um I really want to thank you
because oftentimes discussions about
past present and
future can get a bit abstract and a bit
vague for people and um you've done us
all a great service by making them very
concrete and actionable that's so much
of what this podcast is about it's one
part information one part option for
Action right we don't tell people what
to do but we give them the option for
Action I'm certainly going to adopt some
of the these protocols and also for
taking the time to come to talk with us
today um share your wisdom and share
what you're doing and in many ways well
it is not in many ways it is absolutely
part of what you're describing which is
um putting your best self toward how
things can be better now and in the
future it's also you know a great
pleasure to sit down with somebody I've
known for so many years and uh and uh
learn from you so it's a it's a real
honor and a privilege
and I know um everyone else listening to
and watching this feels the same way so
thank you so much thank you for having
me thank you for joining me for today's
discussion with Ari wallik to find links
to his book to his television show and
other resources related to long path
please see the show note captions if
you're learning from and or enjoying
this podcast please subscribe to our
YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc
cost way to support us in addition
please subscribe to the podcast on both
Spotify and apple and on both Spotify
and Apple you can leave us up to a
five-star review please check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast if you
have questions for me or comments about
the podcast or guests or topics that
you'd like me to consider for the hubman
Lab podcast please put those in the
comment section on YouTube I do read all
the comments for those of you that
haven't heard I have a new book coming
out it's my very first book it's
entitled protocols an operating manual
for the human body this is a book that
I've been working on for more than 5
years and that's based on more than 30
years of research and experience and it
covers protocols for everything from
sleep to exercise to Stress Control
protocols related to focus and
motivation and of course I provide the
scientific substantiation for the
protocols that are included the book is
now available by pre-sale at protocols
book.com there you can find links to
various vendors you can pick the one
that you like best again the book is
called protocols an operating manual for
the human body if you're not already
following me on social media I am
huberman lab on all social media
platforms so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter threads Facebook and
Linkedin and on all those platforms I
discuss science and science related
tools some of which overlaps with the
content of the hubman Lab podcast but
much of which is distinct from the
content on the hubman Lab podcast again
that's huberman lab on all social media
channels if you haven't already
subscribed to our neural network
newsletter our neural network newsletter
is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that
includes podcast summaries as well as
protocols in the form of brief 1 to
three page PDFs those protocol PDFs are
on things like neuroplasticity and
learning optimizing dopamine improving
your sleep deliberate cold exposure
deliberate heat exposure we have a
foundational Fitness protocol that
describes a template routine that
includes cardiovascular training and
resistance training with sets and Reps
all backed by science and all of which
again is completely zero cost to
subscribe simply go to huberman lab.com
go to the menu tab up in the upper right
corner scroll down to newsletter and
provide your email and I should
emphasize that we do not share your
email with anybody thank you once again
for joining me for today's discussion
with Ari Wallock and last but certainly
not least thank you for your interest in
science
[Music]