welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Lori
Santos Dr Lori Santos is a professor of
cognitive science and psychology at Yale
University she is a world expert in
happiness and in the science of emotions
generally today we talk about true
happiness
not in any kind of loose and
aspirational way but instead what the
research really tells us about how to
create lasting happiness for ourselves
we talk about relationships and
happiness that is relationships of all
kinds between friends between romantic
Partners between family members and of
course with ourselves we talk about all
of that in the context of what to do
what not to do and how to frame your
whole notion of What happiness is and
how to attain it in the context of daily
Tod do for instance most all of us by
now have heard about the power of
gratitude and gratitude practices in
fact I've done an entire episode about
gratitude and the science of gratitude
but Dr Lori Santos today explains that
by shifting our orientation toward
gratitude toward something more aligned
with what Delights us we are able to
better tap into the mechanisms that
enable us to feel happier in a more
pervasive way we also discuss topics
such as hedonic adaptation that is how
our pursuit of things and our whole
experience experience of pleasure sets
the stage for what's going to feel like
a meaningful Pursuit and pleasureful in
the days and weeks to follow this is
very important for everyone to hear
especially in this Modern Age of
so-called dopamine hits easy to achieve
dopamine highly processed foods and the
various things that you can find online
and speaking of online we also discuss
the role that smartphones and social
media play not just in our happiness but
in our cognition you'll be shocked
indeed I was shocked to learn that just
having your phone in the room where you
are trying to learn something
significantly diminishes your
performance on things like mathematics
and the learning of other topics we get
into all of that today the interrelated
parts and I promise that it's all made
extremely clear and actionable thanks to
Dr Lori Santos's incredible expertise
and she is an incredible teacher in fact
the course that she has taught at Yale
University entitled psychology and the
good life is the most popular course
ever taught at Yale over the course of
300 years and that popularity will not
come as a surprise as you now get to
learn from Dr lorri Santos directly this
was a remarkable episode I must say I
learned so much and I'll just highlight
one big takeaway that I've implemented
in my own life and that you can frame in
the back of your mind as you listen to
today's episode is the difference
between being happy with one's life as
opposed to in one's life and indeed how
to achieve both before we begin I'd like
to emphasize that this podcast is
separate from my teaching and research
roles at Stanford it is however part of
my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to Consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is eight sleep
eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers
with cooling Heating and sleep tracking
capacity I've spoken many times before
on this podcast about the critical need
for us to get adequate amounts of
quality sleep each night that's truly
the foundation of all mental health
physical health and performance and one
of the best ways to ensure that you get
a great night's sleep is to control the
temperature of your sleeping environment
and that's because in order to fall and
stay deeply asleep your body temperature
actually has to drop by about 1 to 3Â°
and in order to wake up feeling
refreshed and energized your body
temperature actually has to increase
about 1 to 3 degrees eight sleep makes
it incredibly easy to control the
temperature of your sleeping environment
by allowing you to control the
temperature of your mattress cover at
the beginning middle and end of the
night I've been sleeping on an eight8
Sleep mattress cover for nearly 4 years
now and it has completely transformed
and improved the quality of my sleep
eight sleep has now launched their
newest generation of the PO cover the
Pod 4 ultra the Pod 4 ultra has improved
cooling and heating capacity higher
Fidelity sleep tracking technology and
even has snoring detection that will
automatically lift your head a few
degrees to improve your air flow and
stop your snoring if you'd like to try
an eight- Sleep mattress cover go to
8sleep.com
huberman to save up to $350 off their
pod 4 ultra eight sleep currently ships
in the USA Canada UK select countries in
the EU and Australia again that's
8sleep.com huberman
today's episode is also brought To Us by
expressvpn expressvpn is a virtual
private Network that keeps your data
secure and private it does that by
routing your internet activity through
their servers and encrypting it so that
no one can see or sell your data now I'm
familiar with the effects of not
securing my data well enough several
years ago I had one of my bank accounts
hacked and it was a terrible amount of
work to have that reversed and for the
account to be secured when that happened
I talked to my friends in the tech
community and what they told me was that
even though you think you're in interet
connection may be secure often times
it's not especially if you're using
Wi-Fi networks such as those on planes
in hotels at coffee shops and other
public places surprisingly even at home
your data might not be as secure as you
think to make sure that what I described
before would never happen to me again I
started using expressvpn the great thing
about expressvpn is that I don't even
notice that it's running since the
connection it provides is so fast I have
it on my computer and on my phone and I
keep it on whenever I'm connected to the
internet with expressvpn I know
everything is secure my web browsing all
my passwords all my data and of course
anything that's behind an account wall
like a bank account it can't be tracked
and no one can access or steal your data
which is terrific if you'd like to start
protecting your internet activity using
expressvpn you can go to expressvpn.com
huberman and you can get an extra 3
months free again that's
expressvpn.com slh huberman to get an
extra 3 months free and now for my
discussion with Dr Lori s Santos Dr Lori
Santos welcome thanks so so much for
having me on the show I want to talk
about this thing that everyone seems to
want but most everyone has trouble
keeping themselves in a state of
Happiness which raises the question of
whether or not we should even be seeking
to constantly be in a state of happiness
but just to sit back from that question
for a moment how should we think about
the relationship between emotions and
this thing that we call cognition
because I think a lot of where we're
going today is to distinguish between
feelings thoughts and behaviors and as
neuroscientists psychologists
Etc we have to understand the difference
between emotions and cognition and maybe
where they overlap so if you could
educate us a bit on that I think that
will uh set the stage nicely for
understanding happiness yeah well I'm
glad you started there actually because
you know the very definition of
happiness I think as social scientists
tend to think about it includes both of
these parts right so I think social
scientists tend to think about happiness
as being happy in your life and being
happy with your life so being happy in
your life is sort of the emotion side
right I have decent number of positive
emotions maybe slightly less negative
emotions like you existing in your life
feels good that's kind of an emotional
part right um but then there's also kind
of how you think your life is going do
you have purpose are you kind of happy
with how things are going it's how you
think about your life which is sort of a
cognitive thing and so even the earliest
social scientists who started thinking
about happiness at the time they call it
subjective wellbeing so I think
psychologists were like happiness TS
sounds too wooy like we'll call it
something else but it means exactly the
same thing it means subjective wellbeing
right when they started thinking about
subjective well-being they divided it
into this sort of affective emotional
part which is like how you feel in your
life but also this cognitive part how
you think your life is going so that
basic dichotomy has been there since the
very beginning of folks studying
happiness
scientifically I'm already struck by
this distinction between how things are
going in your life versus with your life
um one requires a a kind of firstperson
experiencing of life in your life you
know do you wake up feeling good are you
um feeling good with your inside of your
friendships and other relationships
family romantic relationships school
work the other um involves a bit of a
third personing of self yep of looking
at one's um CV either actual CV or um
reflected CV uh through the lens of
other people and kind of getting a sense
like am I doing well am I not doing well
um I think this is a really important
distinction um because it seems like
ultimately the goal if I may is to be
happy in your life regardless of the
third personing provided that you're not
doing damage to somebody else's
happiness in life yeah well I think
ideally it'd be nice to do both right
and I think there are moments when these
things dissociate right so you know you
interact with lots of interesting rich
people out here in California I think a
lot of them have
kind of in their life feels pretty good
right they have lots of hedonic
Pleasures they're drinking nice wine
hanging out Beach you be amazed at how
much how much I'm how much suffering
they report oh that's interesting how
much suffering they report so this is
the question is is is this sort of
cognitive part the like third person
part or is it the reporting part and I
think when the psychologists are
thinking about it they really think
about it as the reporting part right and
and this gets tricky right because you
know I see folks having their nice glass
of wine on the beach and I'm thinking
like that's coming with lots of positive
emotion like I bet if I tested them and
could have a direct look at their
sensory experience and probably be
pretty positive it's only when they
reflect on their life and they're asking
well how's it going that they say oh you
know I don't know my stocks went down or
like when I hear about um lack of
Happiness let me think of some of the
kind of bullet point ones that seem to
come up repetitively are they are indeed
not related to lack of resources I don't
hear that what I've heard and this is
also true for where I spend part of my
time in where I grew up which is in
cicon Valley which is also not everyone
but there are people there who have
accured tremendous amount of wealth the
mean has shifted very high at and hence
the cost of living um but it's often
concerns about
um their kids yeah or their mother is
ill their child is struggling in a
particular way um very often that's what
it is they're concerned about the lack
of well-being in their kids Rel related
to mental health or physical health or
other relatives mental health physical
health or they're upset about something
politically yeah but we won't go there
we won't go there yeah no I think this
is true right you know so much of our
happiness is made up of the happiness of
other people right um both kind of how
they're doing and how we think they're
doing cognitively but literally just
emotionally right you know if you've
ever been around a family member or a
spouse who was incredibly pissed off
really sad it's it's incredibly hard not
to catch those emotions yourself and we
as psychologists know how these
processes work right these process are
emotional contagion where you're
literally catching the emotions of other
people and so oftentimes the things that
you most worry about to be happy
yourself is focusing on the happiness of
the people around you because that
literally becomes your happiness at a
very fundamental
level now I'm pausing just to think
about this a little bit more as we grow
up um and I realize it varies by place
and lots of circumstances but as we grow
up we are taught to pay attention to how
our life is going a bit from the outside
we yeah gain evaluations starting really
young little stars on our pictures or
good job or nowadays they say great
effort in
drawing this whole thing the growth
mindset language um but I don't know
that in the United States we are taught
to um think about being happy in our
life yeah right as as kids kids I think
all kids all all mammals seem to
gravitate towards um joyful experiences
for them playing is almost always an
innate um joyful experience but then as
the evaluations start coming in we we
get better and better at assessing our
performance and where we are um relative
to the sort of standard goals of the
third grade the fifth grade the 12th
grade um but at the same time I don't
think anyone ever sat me down and said
um how are you going to evaluate if
you're feeling good in your life like
that you're savoring your soccer game
that you're savoring your time with
friends that was never never taught to
me yeah and I think there's a real
danger of these kind of extrinsic
rewards as you might call them all the
stuff outside the grades you know the
performance measures and so on literally
stealing your intrinsic rewards um
there's this funny phenomenon on
psychology where if you have something
that's intrinsically rewarding so let's
say exercise right like I want to go out
you know and like you to run like a
bunch right I love running I get this
intrinsic reward from running now I get
some sort of tool whether it's my watch
or something I'm scribbling down in a
phone app and I have to like log my
running now it becomes a sort of
extrinsic reward it's not just like the
feeling of running but it sort of takes
on this extrinsic idea and then what
happens is sometimes we end up going for
that reward anyway um the fiction writer
David sideras has this wonderful uh
article called the Fitbit life where he
talks about how he wanted to get fit
it's in intrinsic reward of you know
exercising more and he got the Fitbit
and then it was all about the Fitbit he
would set the level higher and set the
level higher and he himself was
miserable and no longer enjoying running
to the point that like at some point he
just would walk around you know shaking
his arm just to get up to those final
steps right that's a really terrible
case where your extrinsic reward winds
up taking over but so many of the cases
you just talked about are ones in our
real life where that comes up much more
insidiously than like a Fitbit or
something like that you talked about
play in mammals the easiest thing that
little kid animals do all over over the
place little kid humans don't do that as
much anymore because even from really
young ages they're you know in toddler
you know University where they're kind
of learning things to get into the next
grade and get the perfect grade so they
can get into institutions like ours
right it all becomes about extrinsic
rewards and so I think you're really
right we're kind of extrinsic sizing all
the rewards to the point that we're not
getting to internal happiness it was
hard already to pay attention to that
stuff because I think we'll probably
talk about this it's hard to be mindful
about your emotion you really have to
pay attention to what's going on but I
think it's gotten even harder because we
have these metrics they're all over the
place in our culture but they're just
not the intrinsic thing there's some
extrinsic marker that could make the
intrinsic thing even less fun for people
that um grow up or live in areas where
well let's just say that that have less
um disposable wealth um is there there
must be data on sort of um relationship
to Intrinsic versus extrinsic um forces
on happiness I mean I can make up all
sorts of stories in my head about how
people starting out from very different
circumstances would be more or less
happy but what do the data say yeah so
these effects of kind of resources on
happiness are really interesting and
they're nuanced right so if you look at
the lower end of the kind of income
Spectrum you would obviously say that
money affects happiness right if you
can't put food on the table if you can't
put a roof over your head definitely
getting a little bit more is going to
affect your happiness in a positive way
and the data sort of bear this out um
this very there's a very famous study by
the uh Nobel prize winning Economist
Danny conoman rip um back in 2010 he did
this cool study where he looked at the
correlation between income and happiness
as reported in how much stress you have
um how much positive emotion you
experience and so on at the low end of
the income scales it just goes up and up
and up right more money just almost
linearly gives you more happiness but
what Danny found and is the second part
of this nuanced picture is that that
slope kind of levels off and it levels
off in $210 at around
$75,000 what does that mean that means
if you get more than
$75,000 um you're not going to feel any
less stressed you're not going to
experience any more positive emotion
even if I double or triple or quadruple
your income on those metrics you're not
going to see any increase then those are
um pre-tax 2010 yeah they didn't get
into like the real CU you're like oh my
god well I live in California like if
you live in Iowa maybe it's not so bad
but like and those numbers will change
but the upshot is there's probably some
number in like 20 25 2024 numbers that
might be like you know maybe $1,000
$120,000 whatever it is the point is
that there's some number at which
getting more is not going to increase
your happiness at the same slope now
there's been nuanced fights about this
as there is a lot in kind of real
research about well is that really true
does the slope really ever go up and now
the picture seems to be well the slope
might go up a teeny tiny like negligible
bit but it doesn't go up as as much as
say getting extra 10 minutes of exercise
in or another 20 minutes of sleep or
scribbling the things you're grateful
for all those things will impact your
happiness much more than like
quintupling your income and so do do
your resources affect happiness yeah if
you ain't got any resources you
definitely will feel happier if you can
get them but if you have a lot getting
more really isn't going to help sorry to
interrupt but lately I've been um saying
on the basis of those findings about
this than 75 yeah K per year probably
now like you said 100 to 125k let's just
say something like that um would be the
equivalent amount uh that money indeed
cannot buy happiness but it can buffer
stress do you think that's true you're
making me rethink that statement maybe
it doesn't buffer stress past a certain
amount yeah I mean I think in in the
original e conoman data he found that it
doesn't right I mean how much stress you
report on a daily basis was literally
one of the measures they were using for
happiness but I think you're right it
can the risk around it can buffer it
right I think if you're at a certain set
of means you know that like you know if
a bad thing happens you're going to be
okay so it can allow you to make riskier
decisions that can allow you to do
things that you might not do if you're
right at that boundary where losing some
money it might pop you back down I think
the problem is that one of the ways we
evaluate our financial situation but
pretty much every situation I think this
goes back to the nurse science is that
we don't do it objectively we do it
relative and when you think about your
relative financial status there's lots
of other folks around to whom you're
comparing yourself I think one of the
reasons that rich folks don't
necessarily think they're less stressed
when they have very high levels of
wealth and so on is because they're
looking around and everyone's doing much
better than them like and this is just a
fundamental feature of the way we
evaluate stuff right is that we don't
evaluate in objective terms we evaluate
relative to these reference points and
honestly as you get you're kind of going
up this sort of logarithmic scale where
their reference points are getting even
further away from you and I think that
that can have a huge hit on people's
perception of their own happiness and
their perception of their stress levels
right because they're working towards a
goal that's probably not going to make
them that much happier but they haven't
kind of abandon this intuition that more
money will make me happy um on my
podcast the happiness lab I had this guy
Klay cockroll who is really fun he's a a
a wealth psychologist so he's a mental
health professional that only works with
the 0.00001%
and already we should say well if if
wealth made you happy he should be out
of a job but no he's lots of clients
lots of I guess very well-paying clients
he looked like he was doing well for
himself um but he talks about how those
folks haven't abandoned this notion that
more money will make them happy they set
some standard like oh as soon as I
become as soon as I get 50 million I'll
be happy or as soon as I become a
billionaire but then they get to that
point they're not feeling any more
positive emotion they're not feeling
less stressed and rather than saying
well hang on maybe that hypothesis was
wrong more money doesn't work they say
ah the hypothesis it's all right more
money will make me happy I just got a it
wasn't 50 million now it's 100 million
or whatever it is and so I think that
that's a lot due to the fact that folks
are comparing their wealth levels
against others and our our comparison
system sucks because we constantly
compare ourselves against others but we
never pick people that are doing worse
than us we always pick people who are
doing better than us I know a fair
number of very happy wealthy people I
know a fair number of very miserable
wealthy people I know a fair number of
um happy uh non-wealthy people and a
fair number of
miserable inside they report feeling
miserable um un unwealthy people well it
fits completely with what you know a lot
of the happiness research suggests right
which is that it's much less about our
circumstances than we think when it
comes to who's happy and who's not right
you know we often think you know if I
could get more money or if I could get
more accolades at work or if I could get
a new partner if I could move somewhere
I'd be happier but exactly what you're
saying if you look at people with all
those different life circumstances both
the good version and the bad version
find some happy folks and some not so
happy folks and now what researchers are
starting to think is that it actually
doesn't involve our circumstances as
much as we think again I like with
bracket it unless those circumstances
are really dire circumstances don't
matter as much as we think it tends to
be the kind of stuff that's much more
under our control than our circumstances
right it tends to be how we behave what
are what thought patterns we use the
emotions we seek out the social
connection we experience those things
matter much more and so I think you know
your experience with the happy and not
so happy Rich folks and the happy and
not so happy poor folks kind of bear out
what we think it's like it's just not
your circumstances that doesn't matter
as much as you
assume let's talk about this
relationship between feelings thought
patterns and behaviors in the context of
happiness I think anyone listening to
this or watching this probably wants to
be happy as much as possible I mean I
suppose there are few songwriters poets
and I've got some friends in in uh in
those uh domains of life and they do
seem to derive a lot of um insight and
inspiration and have done amazing things
um through the kind of depths of uh
unhappy human emotion um we can get back
to that later because I do think there's
something about the contrast of moving
from these more painful emotions to
happiness that's very different than
moving from a state of immense happiness
to slightly less but we can get back to
that but most people would like to be
happy as much as possible
I certainly would who wouldn't and one
of course can ask well should I work on
my feelings like think about my feelings
try and shift my feelings let my
feelings move through me in a cathartic
way um should I work on the thought
patterns should I work on the behaviors
I'm a big believer from from my own
experience that behaviors are powerful
in setting the general trajectory of
thought patterns and feelings but I've
also experienced it going the other way
too so what does the research say about
this and what what can we do cuz
everyone wants to be happier yeah well
we just talked about the thing you're
not supposed to do you don't have to
change your circumstances and that's
great because like quintupling your
income is tricky you know moving is
tricky you know switching your life
around all over the place is hard right
the good news is design shows you don't
have to do that that doesn't work as
well as you think but you can hack your
behaviors and your thought patterns and
your feelings to get some good results
right let's let's take behaviors right
one of the biggest behavioral changes
you can make to feel happier is just to
get a little bit more social connection
like psychologists do these fun studies
where they look at people's like daily
usage pattern so how much time are you
spending sleeping or exercising or at
work or whatever and the two things that
predict whether or not you're happy or
not so happy is how much time you spend
with friends and family members and how
much time you're just physically around
other people like the more of that you
do the happier you're going to be um and
you know that's just a correlation right
so your Savvy listeners are thinking
right now like well is it that hanging
around with other people causes you to
be happy or do you tend to like hang out
with other people more if you are happy
like which direction does the causal
Arrow go and here we have these lovely
Studies by psychologists who do these
kind of funny experiments where they
offer people like a $10 Starbucks gift
card to just talk to somebody um usually
talk to a stranger like that they don't
know on the train it's some lovely work
by Nick Epley and others have done this
becauseas you force people to get Social
and what people predict especially with
strangers is like oo that's going to
feel awkward and kind of weird but what
you find across the board and this
includes in introverts and extroverts is
that talking to somebody actually feels
good it increases your positive emotion
it gives you a sense that your life is
going better you feel less lonely it
just has these positive outcomes that we
don't
expect I love social connection the
problem I have with social connection is
that if I drop in with somebody for you
know 30 minutes or a couple of hours
when that's done I usually have so much
that I need to tend to that I end up
staying up later than I need to in order
to complete that diminishing my sleep
and then I feel like there's a
underlying kind of like sinking ship
sense to my physiology and then I have
to recover my sleep so it you know
everything's a trade-off yeah um what's
interesting about the study you just
mentioned is that it's just a brief
coffee presumably so maybe one doesn't
need to spend quite as much time um with
people but I think uh you know I think
like even years ago actually he's dead
now but there was a I guess it's okay to
say even though he's dead he was a
somewhat excentric professor at UC
Berkeley I took a class from him when I
was a graduate student there named Seth
Roberts he's known for some kind of
bizarre theories about eating and if
people want to look this up like really
really kind of different stuff but I I
applaud his bravery and just you know
being out there but he was an accentric
guy and he told us in this class when I
was there that that it was very
important to see
faces um at least once a day real faces
not on a screen this was before social
media but um and that it was important
at some point to leave your apartment
and and like see the Barista and say
hello and thank you and say see people
on the street and um and now knowing
what we know about these dedicated areas
of the brain like the fusor face gyrus
and Nancy kwish work and about about
these brain areas like we are hardwired
for seeing faces and recognizing faces
now that alone doesn't mean that faces
is a requirement for being happy on a
consistent basis but I think they were
on to something I think Seth was on to
something even though he had some also
just like completely crazy ideas this
idea doesn't seem crazy this has been my
experience even though I spent a lot of
time alone if I go a few days without
seeing a face MH something happens
inside that that shifts the way my
internal kind of um set point for
well-being and then you see somebody and
it's like it's like delightful even if
it's just a hello kind of thing I think
you know the reason why social
connection matters so much is it's
building off this basic neural circuitry
right for seeing faces and so on I think
that gives us real insight into the
kinds of social connections that work
best right which has been characterized
in the field of sort of in real time
social connection right which we're kind
of moving away from so what do I mean by
in real time you know you and I are
sitting in a studio right now chatting
and we're kind of chatting in real time
I can see your face we're live but we
might have been able to do this like
over some sort of video chat wouldn't be
as good you know but but it's pretty
good and the reason it seems to be
pretty good is we're doing it in real
time right our auditory system our
visual system all these systems that are
used to as primates processing things
with other folks around you it works
reasonably well what doesn't work so
well is how we often communicate which
is like overs slack over text I text you
few minutes later it comes back like our
primate brains just like that that's
just not the way communication is set to
work and so I think sometimes when I
bring up Social connection people think
like oh got to see people in person and
my friends going to live far away and
I'm like at work all day it's like no no
no you can connect not necessarily live
and in person but as much as possible
try to do it in real time and I think
that's in part and if possible try to do
it with video I think for the reason
that you were just talking about is it
faces activate us but you know we're
primates that are also really good at
language and paying attention to the
voice I think it's one of the reasons
that like an old school phone
conversation no video chat with your
friend can be some of the most emotional
connective conversations sometimes is
better than in person because when we're
in person we're pulling out our phones
and checking and paying attention to
other stuff but but we got to get back
towards in real time the other stuff
just doesn't have the same psychological
oomph is
there any evidence that texting actually
drives more of a desire for more social
connection and thus leaves us feeling
less well than prior to a text exchange
I I I realize it's very hard to separate
out the variables about what's the
nature of the text exchange um
you how often do you see this person in
um in real life Etc but I could imagine
that texting the I don't do the sound
effect as well as you do I I like that
uh but that texting could be the
equivalent of getting crumbs of
nourishment not full nourishment I could
also imagine that it's like putting
nourishment just Out Of Reach yeah and
and I'm asking this really at a
neurological level do we know does is
the reward circuitry that's triggered by
in real life social connection triggered
but to a lesser degree by text exchange
or by Zoom
exchange this would be an important
study to do I think yeah there's not
great evidence for it but my intuition
is that the way it works is almost like
it's a texting sort of The neutr Suite
of social connection right I was feeling
his motivation for social connection and
I did it and and I got something that
was sort of social I got some
information but like psychologically I'm
missing the like nutritious part of it
right so it kind of fakes you out into
thinking that it's social connection but
it kind kind of doesn't really work and
I worry that that's what we're all
getting a lot of right now right it's
just so much easier to participate in
the nutric version of social connection
because as political scientists and
sociologists and others have pointed out
it's harder to meet with people in real
life we don't have these so-called third
spaces where we can get together easily
anymore right there's so many draws of
just being on your screen being alone
inside um I think we're kind of missing
out and so so a lot of us are kind of
starving nutritionally when it comes to
social connection we're going for the
wrong stuff so schedule some if possible
in real Lifetime with somebody or in
real time right you know call that
friend that you haven't talked to um and
recognize because this is clear from the
psychological research that your brain
is not telling you to do that probably
even when you're listening right now
you're like yeah I guess that would be
helpful for me but you're not kind of
having a craving to talk to your friend
and I think this is the problem with a
lot of the behaviors that map on to
happiness is that if you think of The
evolutionary pressures for those
behaviors natural selection never had to
build in like the goal of feeling Social
cuz we were just like in these small
bands it was really easy right natural
selection had to build in a kind of
craving for sweet fatty food because
those were hard to find didn't have to
build in the craving for like you know a
bunch of greens because they were
everywhere I think the same thing is
true with social connection we just
don't have a strong motivation to seek
people out because it was just kind of
there and so I think our motivation our
reward systems don't cause us to kind of
crave it but in the modern day where
there's so many substitutes and we're
kind of more isolated I think many of us
are kind of experiencing the negative
effects of loneliness but then when we
think well what could I do to get out of
it there's not this like I'm starving
for connection we don't have this sort
of motivational goal to go out and get
it and so what that can lead to is
people making the prediction in their
head of like you I just heard lri say
that this is a good idea but like I
don't know probably not for me or maybe
not as important I think we just don't
have systems that tell us to go out and
get this stuff so even if your brain is
saying it's not that important try it do
your own personal experiment and get a
little bit more in real time social
connection and just take a moment to
notice immediately after how it made you
feel and I bet it'll be like you know
all the kind of Fitness hacks and
nutrition hacks that you talk about on
the show where you're like oh my God
that made me feel so much better than I
really expected it to I'd like to take a
quick break and acknowledge our sponsor
ag1 ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic
drink that also includes prebiotics and
adaptogens ag1 is designed to cover all
of your foundational nutritional needs
and it tastes great now I've been
drinking ag1 since 2012 and I started
doing that at a time when my budget for
supplements was really Limited in fact I
only had enough money back then to
purchase one supplement and I'm so glad
that I made that supplement ag1 the
reason for that is even though I strive
to eat most of my foods from Whole Foods
and minimally processed foods it's very
difficult for me to get enough fruits
vegetables vitamins and minerals
micronutrients and adaptogens from food
alone and I need to do that in order in
order to ensure that I have enough
energy throughout the day I sleep well
at night and keep my immune system
strong but when I take ag1 daily I find
that all aspects of my health my
physical health my mental health and my
performance both cognitive and physical
are better I know that because I've had
lapses when I didn't take ag1 and I
certainly felt the difference I also
notice and this makes perfect sense
given the relationship between the gut
microbiome and the brain that when I
regularly take ag1 which for me means a
serving in the morning or midm morning
and again later in the afternoon or
evening that I have more mental Clarity
and more mental energy if you'd like to
try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com
huberman to claim a special offer right
now they're giving away five free travel
packs and a year supply of vitamin D3 K2
again that's drink a1.com huberman to
claim that special offer if seeing faces
and I don't have evidence for this but
if Seth Roberts was right and what we're
talking about here is clearly um based
on existing data if seeing faces somehow
triggers the reward system in a healthy
way that reinforces the social
connection thing like fills the vessel
that like we're connected because we no
longer live in small small village and
tribe type formats most of us don't
anyway that if we plop down onto the
couch and kind of like assume the
classic C c-shaped position of somebody
who's about to go on their phone and and
you can scroll and see faces you talked
about that as a bit of like an
artificial sweetener giving the illusion
of some sort of nourishment and then you
know you see some stuff you respond to
stuff you can see someone kind of dunk
on somebody maybe hear a joke maybe make
a joke and then go into your DMs and
like read a few check a you and then um
you basically got no real social
connection correct um you didn't have to
move to do it um and in a lot of ways
this has parallels to the ease of um
highly processed foods or something like
that and I think we're starting to
understand this a bit through Jonathan
height work and other people's work uh
including your own but I don't know that
it's anything but really dangerous and
bad I don't want to sound alarmist but I
I am really concerned that um certainly
for the younger generation but that if
we don't have an intrinsic drive to go
do something we stop doing it we stop
doing it and then the brain is pretty
plastic throughout the entire life
especially for these low-g grade like
many times repeated behaviors I mean we
can just slowly that you know it's like
a dri there's drift and then we wonder
why we don't feel so good yeah I mean
you know how the dopamine system works
right like it has these mechanisms to
Crave stuff that's quick quick hits
right our instant you know when we go on
Reddit or go on Instagram and scroll
through a feed we're getting these kind
of quick hits another thing that is
rewarding is new information you know
you're Stanford College J zaki's done
these lovely Neuroscience studies that
just finding out some interesting social
information feels rewarding and kind of
for the first time we've been able to
separate the reward value that comes
from interacting with live Human people
and faces and social rewarding
information that comes at us quickly at
this dopamine Hit That We crave a lot
but we don't have the craving mechanisms
for the in real life connection and yeah
I think that's causing a lot of problems
and it means we're kind of building more
tools to do just that uh I had the
musician David burn on on my podcast um
Talking Heads David who cares a lot
about these issues he wrote this really
cool article in um called eliminating
the human where he made the claim that
pretty much every technological
invention of the last 20 years has been
you know dealing with actual people is
kind of friction so let's just get rid
of them right we'll you know have Uber
or Lyft or a car company where I don't
have to talk to the driver I just plug
it into the phone we don't have to have
a conversation we go away right we have
music streaming mechanisms I don't know
you're and Andrew you're like as my age
so you probably remember that you used
to have to go into a record store to
flip through CDs or tapes even if you're
old really old school to figure out
music and often when you do that you'd
run into humans or talk to the cashier
guy or somebody would see you flicking
through like oh you like Talking Heads I
like Talking Heads now we just go to an
algorithm right from food delivery apps
to kind of education right I have a
online course where students don't have
to sit in a real classroom with other
students they could watch it directly
so many of our technological innovations
are assuming that what we want to get
rid of is the friction part that's what
we're kind of motivated to get rid of
but ultimately we're getting rid of like
the human in these interactions and our
primate brains are left you know with
the like little nutrite dribbles of
connection when what we really need is
something in real life and in real time
it's interesting because I think just
but 10 15 years ago our knowledge of
most all humans was based on in real
life experience except for I guess
famous humans and then it was not in
real life now most people's knowledge
about most humans is based on not in
real life
interactions which means that most
people's knowledge about humans
generally is kind of
acing through non in real life
electronic experiences and so that has
to change our entire schema of like what
human experience is I'm not trying to
you know like ratchet up to something
too abstract here but um I think it's a
it's a powerful notion that what burn is
saying that we're dehumanizing ourselves
um through you know getting essentially
fragments of of in real life experience
maybe a and video is so captivating as
you know as somebody who's was a vision
scientist for a long time I mean if if a
picture is worth a thousand words a
video is worth 10 billion yeah pictures
it's just like and the number of videos
that you can access in in an Instagram
feed or even on an X feed is just
astonishing and then of course the high
emotional Salient stuff is going to be
the the stuff that you you hover on and
then the algorithm knows your dwell time
as it's called and then your your basic
feed and Discovery is set by that and
and you know I don't think it there's
anything really inherently diabolical
about it I don't take that stance it's
just they figured out some good
Neuroscience based on behavioral
foraging yeah I mean the Diabolical part
is is having a real consequence for our
happiness certainly having a real
consequence for loneliness you look at
rates of loneliness in young people
who've grown up with these Technologies
and you see things like you know young
people today report being lonely at
rates of like 70 75% right more people
are lonely extremely lonely than not
right now how do we rate loneliness I'm
not I'm not dismissing what they're
saying but since they grew up that way
I'm this sounds very this sounds very
cross generational judgment but like how
do they know they're lonely I mean your
point is well taken right if anything
they grow up lonely so if they're
self-reporting being lonely now it might
be even worse then it might be kind of
getting worse over time yeah and so I
mean it's all self-report data right so
people you know on a scale of 1 to 10
how lonely are you feeling but the fact
that 75% of people are saying yeah I
feel extremely lonely that's sad I mean
our Prime ancestors if they could look
at us would be like what have you these
wonderful social bra they were probably
like I want to go hide behind that rock
for a little bit get a little bit of
space I'll never forget years ago when I
uh uh there was this time when I worked
with ferrets I don't miss it and and uh
they would have these huge litters and
there were these in these um pens they
the um the the mom could climb up and
get up on top there and so she'd have
these huge litters and she'd kick the
litter off at some point she'd go up
there and sleep and um and you'd go in
there to take to take out the moms and
um and uh they did not that was the only
time when they didn't want to be
bothered right because they they love
they love to be held and things like
that but they did not want to be
bothered because they just needed some
peace cuz they had like 16 fit kits you
know so I think that nowadays right if
if there's if there's a lot of
loneliness um and people that are
growing up in these electronic formats
report feeling lonely and I believe them
then what it speaks to is a yearning and
to me a yearning is a neurological Drive
the same way that a room that's too warm
you want to get to a cooler space it's
too cold you want to get to heat so that
loneliness speaks to an underlying
yearning for something that they're not
getting I'm just stating the obvious but
it says that we're or they are doing
something that's inherently against the
grain of their healthy neurology the
problem is I think what loneliness is a
recognition of is you know you kind of
don't like this state but I'm not sure
that loneliness is causing people to
seek out more social connection or if it
is you're seeking out the thing that is
the easiest fastest social connection
you can get this is just like food which
we talked about is the nut you're not
craving vegetables because they were in
presumably in abundance at one time in
our evolutionary history as opposed to
meat or sweets or things like that fruit
and meat and I think this is a problem
with social connection but I think it's
a problem generally with the kinds of
things that make us happier because like
we just don't have mechanisms to seek
those things out they just kind of don't
code in our reward system in the same
way as you know the neutr sweey stuff of
the world so what is the the term if
there is one um or could you come up
with one I don't want to put you on the
spot for a um a
fundamental um desire that healthy for
us that we are not driven to
pursue a a resolution to like for
everything else you know there's like
the hypothalamic circuits for the desire
to mate to seek warmth when it's cold
cold when it's you know when it's too
warm um you know we know what hunger is
right um but there must be something
about the I don't want to get too
technical here for for those that are
are tracking this what or not tracking
this what I'm trying to say is you know
for so many of the um reward punishment
Pathways in the human brain it's you
you're trying to avoid the feelings of
pain and move toward a feeling of either
neutrality or pleasure but here you're
talking about being in a in a sort of
place of low-level pain being able to
meet that pain with a truly low-level
pleasure that then it doesn't mask the
pain but it it fills the vessel just
enough that then you drive yourself into
a place of essentially more pain but I
think that this is the kind of thing
that happens when you have easy outs for
all these Cravings right I mean take
process food right you you probably have
a a craving for certain nutritional
requirements right you want to get
vitamins or healthy stuff but that
stuff's easy it's frictionless right you
know I run to McDonald's and that's much
faster than cooking up a really healthy
vegetable filled meal I think the same
thing happens with social connection
right like you're lonely person at your
house sitting on the couch you have this
negative bodily state of you feel lonely
maybe it kind of manifests as a craving
but what's the fastest thing for you to
do I'm going to scroll through my
friend's Instagram feeds um or I'm going
to get a kind of little mini hit of
social connection that's not as
nutritious honestly I mean not to diss
our respective Fields but I actually
think this is one reason that people
love podcasts so much right it's a
frictionless way to feel like you're
part of this interesting conversation
but ultimately it doesn't work as well
as picking up the phone and calling a
friend connecting with someone in real
life I think we have too many outlets
for things that kind of feel socially
but don't give us social nutrition and
it's true I mean we should be honest
like really connecting with actual
people in real life takes more friction
than pulling out your phone and
scrolling through your Instagram feed it
just the Instagram feed doesn't work as
well ultimately when it comes to what's
really going to end up being rewarding
and I think this is true for just like a
lot of the way the reward system works
the things that we have craving for that
we seek out that like we have really
strong mechanisms to go after sometimes
those things don't work to get us
towards real likability um you know
drugs of addiction are a real obvious
answer to this right you know if you
have a a kind of heroin problem you're
going to really seek out that drug But
ultimately it's not bringing you towards
something I mean it will maybe feel good
in the moment but it's you know no
you're not neutr sweee but it's not
getting you towards something that
evolutionarily would be really awesome
for your survival and reproductive
success well I try my best not to speak
in tweets which I guess they now call
expost but um I've been saying a lot and
I'll say it again now that I think one
everyone should beware any dopamine that
is not preceded by effort in order to
achieve it uh in other words any fast
High inflection of dopamine that does
not require effort to achieve it is
going to put you in a trough and on a
you know a metaphorical lever pressing
cycle that will drive your trough deeper
and deeper over time and that Peak will
just never go as high as it did or could
again unless you take a period of
abstinence from that behavior or
substance and then introduce effort
prior to a adaptive Behavior to get the
dopamine the other thing is I've um
thought I like to think of addiction as
a progressive narrowing of the things
that bring you pleasure mhm um and I
don't speak to Enlightenment but
happiness or Enlightenment seems like a
progressive um broadening of the things
that bring you pleasure and I'm glad
we're talking about reward circuitry
because we know how to reset that reward
circuitry and it doesn't require these
dopamine fasts although that's one
approach and that makes sense why people
do it but I think this notion of having
to spend effort to engage in what we
know as a hardwired source of reward not
just dopamine but other neurochemicals
as well of course in the form of social
connection so this higher friction thing
of having to call somebody or drive
someplace or deal with traffic deal with
traffic on the way home yeah well worth
it if it was a good social interaction
but maybe it wasn't a me social
interaction in which case you're like
that was that was a lot of driving today
now all this other stuff to do other
times a great social interaction can set
you in an amazing uh tional plane for
days if not weeks yeah so you know I
think um what you're bringing up is
really important how how do we um
introduce these behaviors not asking you
to put it into a standardized protocol
too much but since we started with this
issue of behaviors being a path to more
happiness and social connection being
the uh in real life social connection or
by phone in real time as you said being
one of the main paths to behavioral
happiness behaviorally derived happiness
excuse me then what are the data on sort
of the frequency of this does it vary
for introverts versus extroverts this
question is getting very long but maybe
we could Define introverts and
extroverts and then if you would if you
could give us some sense of you know how
often should people seek out an in real
life interaction yeah probably way more
than you think you should right we have
good data on what people predict which
is that people predict social
interactions just not going to be that
fun um it's not going to be worth it
right this seems to be a spot where our
predictions about how good something's
going to be don't necessarily match how
good it ultimately will going to be
right and I I put it in the context of
like other the the reverse of something
like processed food where I think for a
lot of people you predict this is going
to be amazing and you taste you're like
now I feel kind of gross processed food
processed food right that's a case where
your prediction is like oh this is going
to be awesome but your actual
likeability is like H I feel kind of
yucky where social connection I think we
predict be all right but maybe not that
good but when we get it we feel really
great um the the the University of
Chicago psychologist Nick Epley has this
term he uses UND sociality where he
thinks we just kind of don't get the
right reward benefit of social
connection a RIT large right he talks
about examples of you know expressing
gratitude to people giving somebody a
compliment even things like asking for
help right all these domains where we
can kind of connect with another person
we sort of was like yeah it may be net
good if I was rating it on some scale
but it winds up being way better than we
predict in all these contexts um he does
these studies where he has people you
know pred how good something will be you
know giving a gift to somebody brings
he's in Chicago right so he's like
here's a hot chocolate how how good will
it feel to like you know give that guy
over there a stranger the hot chocolate
and people say you know I don't know
three out of 10 but then they do it and
then they feel oh it's like more like a
six out of 10 it was much more rewarding
for me the giver than I thought same
thing with compliments expressing
gratitude calling a friend you haven't
talked to in a long time reaching out to
somebody that you care about but you
haven't connected with all these spots
are ones where our predictions are off
it's not the veilance that's off we know
it'll be good but we just don't realize
how good and his argument is that if we
don't realize how good then we never
seek it out so it's kind of the opposite
of what you might think of as the
processed food problem where our
prediction is like oh my God that
cupcake is going to be so good we have
all these mechanisms that are like Go
Get It Go Get it but then we actually
get it we're like that wasn't as good as
we thought I think that the problem is
that we have all these things that work
like the processed food that interfere
with social connection going on the
Reddit feed you know plopping down and
watching Netflix just kind of being by
yourself right there's all these
alternative behaviors that we're
predicting are going to feel nice but
then we get there they feel kind of
yucky they just um yeah this is a
problem in the happiness space where I
know you talk a lot about the reward
system but the happiness space is one
where the re the Cravings we have the
rewards we seek out the predictions
we're making about what feels good we're
often just really wrong with them you
know my podcast we talk a lot about like
our mind lies to us when it comes for
happiness you know we go for more money
we go for accolades you know we go for
the quick dopamine hits without any work
but really it's more like social
connection it's all these things that we
kind of don't expect are going to feel
good and so I actually don't know what
that means evolutionarily like my theory
is like you didn't need to build in
craving mechanisms because the things
that really matter for our happiness we
just kind of got for free in The
evolutionary environment but it means
it's hard to go after them you mentioned
introverts and extroverts and just to
get back to your longer question this is
something that's been studied in them so
so introverts versus extroverts is
typically thought of as a personality
distinction often thought of as sort of
something that's built in although
there's lots of evidence that over time
you can sort of change these things
around you could become a little bit
more extroverted if you're introverted
um but introverts tend to Value deeper
close conversations one-on-one kinds of
things and a lot of alone time they get
a lot of benefit from alone time whereas
extroverts tend to be more energized by
being around other people especially
bigger crowds of people um and so
introverts tend to be a little bit more
deliberate a little bit more thoughtful
a little bit more kind of want to have
my own personal chill time whereas
extroverts tend to like people and so
you might think that everything I've
just said applies to extroverts but not
to introverts folks have gone out and
tested this and what they find is there
is a big difference between introverts
and extroverts but it's in that
prediction error you know extroverts
predict ah social connection be all
right not that great introverts predict
it's going to be terrible it's going to
be awkward I'm going to hate it but when
you actually force people as in these
studies where you say hey $10 Starbucks
gift card you got to talk to somebody
when you force the introverts to be
social what they wind up doing is
self-reporting you know a level of
Happiness that's like better than they
expected so the problem seems to be that
introverts have a prediction error I'm
going to say this you're going to where
I promise you because I've said this on
my podcast tons of hate mail lots of the
comments will be like not me not this
introvert or maybe they don't they don't
quite understand so I want to make sure
that um it's Crystal Clear for people
introverts anticipate a less than great
or even eh um interaction maybe even a
negative interaction usually negative
usually Negative they anticipate a
negative interaction um you so it's like
saying we're going to go to a restaurant
and the food here Terri sucks they go in
they have a decent to maybe a great
interaction so introverts are are um
positioned to derive more more pleasure
from social interactions than ex
extroverts who enter social situations
thinking it's going to be great their
their dissipation is high and therefore
they require a much bigger dopamine
inflection um in order to come away from
that interaction saying it was great
although the one kind of update to the
framework that you just presented I'd
add is that you said you know well if
you don't you go to the restaurant you
predict it's going to be not that good
and you go and you're like oh it's all
right I think the problem with
introverts is they so predict that
social connection is going to be awkward
that they don't engage in it and now
this becomes a learning cycle right you
predicted it was going to be crappy you
never got any evidence oh maybe I was
wrong and so you keep doing that over
time and so I think that this can lead
to cycles of loneliness in introverts um
and there these lovely accounts of like
introverts who try to become a little
bit more extroverted I had this lovely
woman Jessica pan on the show is this
book called sorry I'm late I didn't want
to come uh colon I I love that I'm
actually pretty social but I'm late to
everything CU I'm an academic noon means
noon 10 which means starting at 12:15
which means at 1:15 when this when the
lecture was supposed to end at 1 you're
still going and half the room is full
this is not just like she had a reason
any academic knows what I'm talking
about yeah I know I'm with you I'm with
you but dude sorry I'm late I didn't
want to come colon an introvert's guide
to extrovert so she did this year where
as a super hardcore introvert she
talked to people joined an improv comedy
group like went to these social
networking kind of busy nasty social
connection events just did all this
stuff and what she found was two things
one is that she actually did enjoy it a
lot more than she thought at the end of
the year she was much happier than she
expected but she also watched her habits
changing too and and this is a thing I
think that we also get wrong about
introverts and extroverts as we assume
I'm born that way you know never going
to change and it is true that there are
predispositions towards this stuff but
the data suggests that if you can maybe
like update your reward value of this
you as an introvert try a little social
connection don't go to like the hugest
party ever or jump in improv comedy just
try call a friend that you haven't
talked to in a while right notice how
that felt like oh I was I was a
prediction error right I actually felt
better than I expected then you might
update your prediction and get and so
you can kind of update your introversion
in part by trying things out and
noticing the reward value you get I
think the thing that is different for
introverts is like you definitely need
your alone time right so you want to
balance any social connection you get
with a little bit of time by yourself
but but the research really shows that
if you're predicting right now like I
just don't like the social connection
you might actually like it more than
your prediction is suggesting I don't
want to micro disect social interactions
to the point of becoming artificial but
I'm fairly introverted I love New York
City and I love London I love busy
cities um so I don't mind being
surrounded by people but one byproduct
of being surrounded by people in a big
city is you're not interacting with
everybody you're seeing lots of faces so
is it the case that introverts are
really uncomfortable in big social
interactions or you know to me um the
most mentally demanding social
interaction would be one where I go to a
party where I know there's going to be
like 20 people everyone's going to have
to go around the room and introduce
themselves goodness yeah um clearly I
don't have a problem with public
speaking but that to me just like spikes
my cortisol immediately um and then
there's sort of an expectation of of
like real connection the the expectation
of real connection often sometimes
undermines real connection sometimes it
serves it yeah but is it the case that
introverts want to avoid people or they
want to avoid um the requirement to
really engage in a in a deep way and I
like engaging in a deep way one to one
or maybe with two or three people you
know maybe a few more but I'm I don't
know that it's the number of people that
becomes overwhelming or daunting or the
punishing feature it's more you know the
sort of requirement to like be pulled
out of oneself yeah I think it might be
all of the above I mean I think what we
know about introverts is that they often
self-report being better in these sort
of one-on-one kind of things so as an
introvert it's like you're going to have
a coffee date with your friend that
often doesn't cause as much Social
Anxiety as like you know the dinner
party with a bunch of people right and
so that's the claim it's not like well
jump into the dinner party with a bunch
of people or join improv promd group or
talk to everyone on the street it's like
just a one-on-one little mini
conversation can be great um and much or
not just like great but much better than
you expect and we'll kind of have this
happiness benefit that kind of sustains
you over time um Nick Epley who does all
this work talks about your happiness the
best metaphor for happiness is that it's
kind of like a leaky Tire like it sort
of goes out a little bit and each one of
these little conversations whether it's
chatting with the Barista calling a
friend giving someone a compliment
whatever kind of fills up the tire and
then it kind of goes down so you can
sort of use these little mini micro does
of social connection to boost your
happiness Tire I'd like to take a quick
break and thank one of our sponsors
function I recently became a function
member after searching for the most
comprehensive approach to lab testing
while I've long been a fan of blood
testing I really wanted to find a more
in-depth program for analyzing blood
urine and saliva to get a full picture
of my heart health my hormone status my
immune system regulation my metabolic
function my vitamin and mineral status
and other critical areas of my overall
health and vitality function not only
provides testing of over 100 biomarkers
key to physical and mental health but it
also analyzes these results and provides
insights from talk doctors on your
results for example in one of my first
tests with function I learned that I had
two high levels of mercury in my blood
this was totally surprising to me I had
no idea prior to taking the test
function not only helped me detect this
but offered medical doctor informed
insights on how to best reduce those
mercury levels which included limiting
my tuna consumption because I'd been
eating a lot of tuna while also making
an effort to eat more leafy greens and
supplementing with Knack and
acetylcysteine both of which can support
glutathione production and
detoxification and worked to reduce my
mercury levels comprehensive lab testing
like this is so important for health and
while I've been doing it for years I've
always found it to be overly complicated
and expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the tests done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function health.com / huberman
function currently has a weight list of
over 250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to huberman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to function
today's episode is also brought To Us by
element element is an electrolyte drink
that has everything you need but nothing
you don't that means the electrolytes
sodium magnesium and potassium all in
the correct ratios but no sugar proper
hydration is critical for optimal brain
and body function even a slight degree
of dehydration can diminish cognitive
and physical performance it's also
important that you get adequate
electrolytes the electrolytes sodium
magnesium and potassium are vital for
the functioning of all the cells in your
body especially your neurons or your
nerve cells drinking element dissolved
in water makes it extremely easy to
ensure that you're getting adequate
hydration and adequate electrolytes to
make sure that I'm getting proper
amounts of hydration and electrolytes I
dissolve one packet of element in about
16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up
in the morning and I drink that
basically first thing in the morning I
also drink element dissolved in water
during any kind of physical exercise
that I'm doing especially on hot days
when I'm sweating a lot and therefore
losing a lot of water and electrolytes
they have a bunch of different great
tasting flavors of element they have
watermelon Citrus Etc frankly I love
them all and now that we're in the
winter months in the northern hemisphere
element has their chocolate medley
flavors back in stock I really like the
chocolate flavors especially the
chocolate mint when it's heated up so
you put in hot water and that's a great
way to replenish electrolytes and
hydrate especially when it's cold and
dry out side when hydration is
especially critical if you'd like to try
element you can go to drink element.com
huberman to claim a free element sample
pack with the purchase of any element
drink mix again that's drink element.com
huberman to claim a free sample pack so
you're talking about engaging in Social
Connection in real time and perhaps even
in in real life um yes in real life as
well with some effort to engage in it
which might just be built into modern
living now as one of the primary drivers
for
Behavioral approaches to improve what
we're calling happiness so could we say
and I know we don't want to set up
strict protocols around this you know
make the effort to schedule in real time
over the phone or Zoom or in real life
interaction with somebody maybe once a
week yeah minimum I think more than
you're doing now if you're not feeling
so happy add some in and and again as
you mentioned before these are all kind
of trade-offs right you don't want to
add so much in them now you're not
sleeping or exercising or all that other
stuff but like one more interaction than
you're getting now and check how it
feels over time given how busy people
are and given that we've established
that some effort that's required to
engage socially is going to be
beneficial toward the the reward and all
this and we're not trying to hack the
dopamine system here folks we're just
trying to figure out what is going to be
rewarding given that everyone has
constraints on their time and everyone
seems to have a device in their pocket
that allows them to get the um the
illusion of nourishment that leads to
either same levels or less happiness
overall um you know what's going to be
most effective and it seems to me I was
thinking about this sure in one of your
answers I was paying attention but I was
thinking about this that my memory of
Prior social interactions as really
great is a useful tool so for instance
one of my best memories of time with my
girlfriend was driving back from her
grandmother's house with the dog in the
car and we had no phone reception so we
couldn't be interrupted by our devices
she actually had some work to do so she
was doing some work on her computer at
one point she may have taken a nap at
one point and the dog kept jumping back
and forth between our laps and that to
me was like one of the best days ever MH
MH just ever it was just an awesome day
um that memory occurred to me now and I
think could serve me well and thinking
okay so like going on a road trip with
somebody but it was the it was the lack
of um kind of structure around it it was
just imposed on us we had a drive to
complete was a dog in the car there was
some work to do there was no phone
reception and of you know we've had many
great interactions but that would be the
one that I'd highlight as like that was
an awesome interaction for whatever
reason yeah and so can one use memories
of great social interaction as kind of a
um as a compass for how to construct
these um these social plans yeah um
because I think it can be a little bit
um mystifying to people like oh how do I
get this thing called Happiness by
meeting up with a friend we enjoy hiking
or something like that but maybe that's
not accessible and I don't want people
to underthink or overthink it yeah but
to me it seems like okay like road trips
everyday things we needed to go up there
there was some things to tend to so like
tending to life things yeah life
requirements together yeah I mean if you
want to ask yourself a question that can
high good memories I recommend the one
that uh the journalist Katherine price
uses a lot she does a lot of studies on
fun ask yourself the question what what
three times that you just had the most
fun the last three times you would
describe as oh my God that was the most
fun right and this is a helpful question
because usually the answer my guess is
at least two out of three probably all
three will have someone else in it like
they'll be you'll have like another
person involved or a dog Sometimes some
other agentive being right it wasn't you
by yourself it probably didn't involve a
screen right and so that's kind of and
and that actually gets back to your your
road trip you know talked about I think
the the social part was really important
but but it seems like that road trip
also tapped into a sort of thought
pattern that we know is really good for
happiness which is presence right just
being kind of mindful you're paying
attention to the dog flopping on you
you're seeing the scenery right you're
not in a rush to do something so your
mind could kind of be on that drive and
how it felt um and we know so much about
how kind of these moments of mindfulness
really paying attention to your sensory
experience how that how much that
matters for happiness and one of the
biggest tasks you can use to get more
presence is to do exactly what you
accidentally did driving through these
parts of the world that where you don't
get phone receptions which is to get rid
of our phones um you know our phones are
just like the biggest attention Stealers
ever and it makes a lot of sense because
what grabs our attention um things that
are really interesting and provide a
little lots of quick dopamine hits right
or just kind of scream at us with
information and announcements and so on
this is what our phones do really well
and our brains aren't stupid our brains
know that on the other side of our phone
is like such rewarding content and it
becomes you know really distracting um
my my colleague Liz Dunn uh has this
kind of analogy she uses like you know
imagine you know instead of this kind of
conversation we're having right here
maybe I'll do with my husband at a
dinner party where I'm sitting my
husband at dinner and we're chatting and
I have my phone out and my husband's a
philosopher he's a very smart guy we
have great conversations but I know on
the other end of that phone is like
really interesting stuff and let said
imagine the comparison is instead of
having your phone there I had this big
wheelbarrow next to me and my husband at
our dinner table and in the wheelbarrow
was photo albums of every photo I've
taken since 2016 physical printouts of
my emails and news articles and stuff
that I could get you know like
videotapes of cat videos and porn and
everything just like piled up really
high in this wheelbarrow if we were
trying to have a conversation that
wheelbarrow was there I'd be like oh I
just want to take a quick look at the
photo or do something it'd be so
distracting it'd be so interesting your
brain's not stupid your brain knows even
though your phone is much tinier than
that wheelbarrow that all that
interesting dopamine Rich exciting stuff
is on it and it makes it hard to pay
attention to my husband again an
interesting philosopher we have great
conversations and so there's lots of
evidence showing that even the act of
having your phone out is subtly stealing
your attention from other people from
the tasks that you're doing one of the
biggest pieces of advice I give my
college students is to study without
your phone near you because Princeton
Studies have looked at this where you
have somebody do say a math test or a
studying test with your phone there
versus the phone in the other room and
you see like double digit increases in
performance just to have your phone away
and you might ask like well why would
that be it's like well part of your
frontal Lo is like no no no don't look
at the phone don't look at the phone
don't look at that big wheelbarrow of
delicious interesting stuff stay on task
and that's this kind of constant moment
of multitasking where we're kind of
yanking our brain back onto task and so
a big hat if you want to be more present
is to find ways to do activities without
your phone I guess if we go back to that
fun question if I said you know those
three times you're having most fun you
weren't in the middle of it pulling out
your phone to like look at your
Instagram feed you were just there and
what you just described was a dramatic
performance enhancement on
mathematics by not having
this opportunity for distraction in the
room which is incredible yeah I mean
that when you look when you dive deep
into the effects of having your phone
around you they're striking especially
getting back to social connection
especially social connection Liz Dunn
has this paper where she um puts two
people in a room just kind of a waiting
room together and you either have your
phone or you don't you're not allowed to
look at it it's just present and she
finds that there's 30% less smiling at
the other people in the waiting room
when your phones are present 30% less um
I mean I actually think of this when I
think of the you know the loneliness
crisis you know I walk I was a head of
college on campus which is a faculty
member at Yale meant that I lived on
campus with students and you'd walk
through the courtyard and everybody's
walking through the courtyard but
they're not looking at you they're
looking down at their phone right um
there these like subtle interactions
that we're missing because our phone is
stealing us that's the social case but I
think there's a real performance case
too right if you want to pay attention
and learn something if part of your
brain is inhibiting that urge to look at
all the interesting stuff on your phone
which we don't notice um then it's going
to be affecting your performance has
good benefits too there's this lovely um
finding that people are buying less gum
and less candy in checkout aisles now um
the like the national worldwide sale of
gum has gone down and it's gone down on
the same slope as the iPhones have gone
up so as number of iPhones in Pockets
goes up sales of gum and checkout lines
has gone down and you can see why that
is you're not looking around as you're
not looking like o that you know like
double mitt looks really good you're
staring at your phone and looking your
Instagram soon the ads are going to pop
up on uh they'll know you're in the
aisle cuz they can know you have
proximity to a lot of devices
I have a friend who a very accomplished
songwriter and musician um and someone
does his Instagram and other social
media for him he he's not on there and
we met for dinner the other day uh with
a couple other people and I got there
and I started telling him about
something I had seen uh online and he
said um I won't use it I usually will do
his voice but I won't do his voice
because I don't want to give it away uh
people might know who he is um but he
said I don't want to talk about what's
on Instagram in fact I don't want to
talk on about what's on the
internet let's just have dinner and I
was and at first I was like dude that
was like kind of and I thought great
like he's exactly right like it's not
just having the phone there it's not
just being on the device it's also that
you're talking about things that you saw
in the world um some of which are very
interesting and important um at times
but what he was saying was I don't want
to talk about things that that you
experienced about somebody else's
experience that wasn't really an
experience that you had today that's an
experience of an someone else's
experience that you had today it wasn't
about a news article or something so
we're playing the telephone Bucket
Brigade game of social connection many
many degrees away from the the actual
interactions that we were kind of
hardwired to experience ourselves yeah
and those are the ones that really influ
uence our our happiness in the world
right you know one of the great ways to
increase your presence in addition to
kind of getting rid of your phone is to
just go back to your sensus right what
are you what are you looking at right
now what do you see right now I'm in
this room there's like really nice kind
of cool black lighting and I'm sitting
there I'm hearing your voice there's
like a subtle hum in the room that I
hope the podcast is not picking up that
I hear in the audio right it's a little
cool that grounding I can watch my
breath completely change around it's
like a quick way to just kind of be
embodied and I think so often we're just
not doing that as much you know in our
discourse but but definitely like even
when we're by ourselves you know we just
wind up distracting ourselves from the
very sensory experience that like
literally is the experience that we have
of the world just not noticing it as
much now I will say that um a memory of
a really terrific time I had alone was
around this time of year actually around
the holidays typically I would be in my
office um organizing papers deal some
end end of year stuff is it for
academics you know my life's a lot
different now with the podcast even
though I still teach at Stanford but the
but end of year is the time when you
kind of get your office organized
everyone every academic knows this and
um over the holidays I tended to have a
lot of time in my office alone it was a
great time to come in like parking was
everywhere you go in and and I used to
listen to Ted Talks or I would listen to
podcast and these days I'm trying to do
more physical things not just exercise
but um working on some like lighting
stuff in my house and and I like to
listen to podcasts or books y sometimes
music but podcasts or books while I do
that and I I do feel that when when
we're alone sometimes it's nice to have
other voices in the room that are not
just the voices in our head yeah and it
could be music podcasts books movies Etc
that people seem to find that soothing I
certainly do and that doesn't feel like
it's diminishing from my experience of
being present in fact it allows me to
just really tend to what I'm doing
mechanically M um and I have some plans
to do some more like craft drawing type
projects in the new year and I look
forward to being able to hear those
conversations but not have to
participate in them yeah yeah yeah so is
this would you consider that sort of
healthy or um am I diminishing my
experience and of the depth of my uh my
crafts yeah well I think it you know
there's there's some Nuance there right
you're talking about your craft in a
very embodied way even as you're talking
to me you're describing how your hands
are moving in these motorways as you're
doing it you're talking about kind of
what it felt like it felt like you your
senses were activated for the physical
stuff you were doing um but you also
mentioned that your mind was wandering
and maybe you're ruminating and stuff
like that so it sounds like what you did
was have a really nice emotion
regulation strategy of like you could
kind of fill your head with something so
that you can work on the physical stuff
but it didn't impede your experience of
the physical stuff the way you described
it shows that you were there you were
present when you were doing it I think
the problem was is when it impedes our
presence doing it and I think it kind of
depends on activity we're doing right um
you know take driving probably some of
you who are listening right now or
sitting in your car as you're driving
doing this other interesting motoric
activity and that's one where it's like
you're not missing out on that much on
the drive by like listening to us it's
probably a positive kind of experience
that you're having learning something
and so on but you know you wouldn't want
to listen to podcasts in some physical
situations right um we can kind of come
you wouldn't you know if you're were
ballroom dancing for example you
wouldn't want to necessarily be
listening to a podcast then right um you
know if you're really experiencing art
and sort of engaging with art in an art
gallery you wouldn't want to also be
listening to a podcast at the same time
and so I think the thing to think is are
you listening to this in a way that
you're missing something in the real
world that your presence of it would
matter make you feel really good um or
are you kind of just like you know
killing some other free time and maybe
using this as a nice emotion regulation
strategy to stop what would otherwise be
a really ruminative drive now you get to
listen to me and Andrew and that's
probably better but but there's Nuance
there I think our tendency is to move
away from the rumination is to run away
from it and I think if you find yourself
kind of avoiding your thought patterns
alt together that probably might be the
pendulum swinging a little too far in
the other direction noted noted so we've
got in real time Andor in real life well
in real life is always in real time but
uh in real life Andor in uh real time
social interaction and if it requires
some effort to plan or get to yeah
organize all the better you stand to
gain more from those interactions so
that's really key presence obviously try
and get the phone out of the room at
least off and put away but ideally out
of out of sight out of sight love that
um and shared experience presumably you
know actually maybe doing something but
it could even just be talking I guess it
depends on what people enjoy doing right
yeah yeah so these are powerful levers
for shifting one level of Happiness up
uh using Behavior what about leading
with thought patterns or feelings seems
like it's a a more challenging but um
certainly tractable entry point yeah and
I think it's it's important here to
remember like what are our natural
evolutionary patterns towards thought
patterns um because some of them aren't
necessarily built for our happiness you
know to take what's a kind of common
evolutionary thought pattern which is a
negativity bias right we're just built
to notice all the scary stuff all the
bad stuff all the potentially risky
stuff our brains instantly go there and
that makes fabulous evolutionary sense
like if there's a possibility that
there's a tiger that's going to jump out
or some sort of risky thing you want
your brain to lock onto it not as
evolutionary beneficial to notice all
the blessings in life just all the good
things it doesn't really give you that
much of a survival benefit to notice hey
there's the absence of a tiger we don't
really know there's no Tigers around
right in fact it it probably helps Drive
um more motivation to go pursue
resources I mean you could imagine an
Adaptive feature to um lacking
satisfaction I mean you can gain more
resources and at a time where resources
were presumably shared more in these
small village formats I don't know do
monkey troops share resources uh depends
on the monkey depends on the monkey just
like humans depends on the depends on
the monkey but but I think you're you're
making a really critical point right
which is like if we're noticing the
negative if we're noticing the bad stuff
we tend to fix it but also if we're
craving if we're wanting if we're kind
of constantly in search of something we
get off our butts and go do stuff I mean
Steve Jobs and his parting words were
stay hungry stay foolish or maybe it was
stay foolish stay hungry but stay hungry
was definitely in there and I realize
he's not going to represent the epitome
of what to strive for for everybody but
he certainly held up as somebody who uh
changed the world um through the
development of certain Technologies so
we rever these people that are um that
are hungry for more yeah right um and it
makes great evolutionary sense doesn't
make as good happiness sense right
what's one of the best ways to be happy
to just appreciate what you have to
notice and appreciate the blessings out
there but it we got to push against this
natural negativity bias to do this so
how do we do that well it turns out that
this is a spot where harnessing
attention in the way we were just
talking about can be really helpful just
taking time to notice the blessings
notice kind of all the good stuff um
it's often talked about in terms of a
gratitude practice although gratitude
sounds kind of cheesy I don't know um my
uh friend Katherine price who I
mentioned earlier she has this practice
that calls a delight practice where you
just notice Delights in the world I love
the word delight you know I walked in
your studio you had a picture of your
bulldog and I was like that's a delight
that's so cute just like thank for
delighting in him I Delight in him too
even though he's dead several years now
um Delight is a wonderful word yeah and
we can train our brain to notice them
right you can literally have a practice
where you know put in your notes app on
your phone like a list of delights or
even better pick a friend like I have
with Katherine where you can just like
text them Delight you know at the end of
this I'll you know text like saw a
really cute dog Delight or heard this
really funny song Delight then you get
the social connection and the Gratitude
but what that does is if you have this
practice where you got to write down the
Delights your brain starts to
automatically be on the lookout for them
it becomes rewarding because you get to
write this thing down now all of a
sudden it can be a practice that you're
sort of Shifting your negativity bias to
notice more of the good things that are
out there um and there's so much
evidence suggesting that people who
naturally notice the blessings in the
world are happier um if you do one of
these kind of gratitude or Delight
practices you wind up happier son your
Luber Mercy has this lovely study where
if you scribble down three to five
things you're grateful for three to five
Delights in as little as two weeks you
significantly improve your overall
satisfaction with life right I love that
super free so much so that I and because
I accidentally interrupted the comments
always tell me I interrupt too much it's
out of interest it's out of Interest I
promise if I could interrupt myself I
would um and I probably do from time to
time could you repeat what the it's
three to five things yeah three to five
things you're grateful for I'm not sure
if the number really matters but it's
committing to kind of noticing the good
things in life and really trying to take
a moment to notice how they felt right
you know so if I look at I do Delight
practices sometimes or gratitude
practices and it's things like my
husband you know these big things in
life but then sometimes it's like my
morning coffee or like probably you know
seeing your cute dog like it's funny to
see the picture for folks that don't
know Andrew Studio it's a picture of his
dog on a microphone it's just very funny
it's a giant high quality photograph he
was actually standing on the table that
I do my solo podcast from with the at
the microphone and his tag just happened
to rotate a few deg toward the camera
just at that moment um so you could see
his name Costello you know and I invite
listeners to pause right now and notice
what's happening to their face as you
hear Andrew say that probably you're
just smiling right you didn't even see
this really cute photo uh but you're
also smiling That's The Power of
delights right not just noticing them
yourself but potentially sharing them
too and so this is another thought
pattern practice that we can engage in
which is like just train your brain to
find these things and what you'll find
is that you know there's a there's a
limited ratio of the stuff we can focus
our attention on if we start shifting
towards the Delights from the hassles
and the yucky stuff in life now we're
just kind of filling our brain with
stuff that gives us a little more
positive emotion what I love about this
conversation about gratitude is I must
say I do like the word delight more than
gratitude gratitude sounds cheesy it
sounds a little hippie dippy I got to
say yeah well I'm from Northern
California so I'm cool with hippie dippy
even though I'm not a hippie punk rocker
not a Hipp you're Berkeley rud c yeah I
know I'm from the other end of the B the
peninsula I love I love the anyway this
is getting but the point is um it's not
that the word feels soft I need to think
about this a little bit more it's that
um maybe it's just that Delight is such
a
powerful unselfish word MH like it's not
taking anything from anybody it's not
requiring a a shift away from one's sort
of um intrinsic self I feel like
gratitude requires this like okay I'm
going to now be grateful it's like kind
of like pulling if if you're not
already in a state of gratitude I feel
like there's more effort involved and
we've been saying effort that precedes
reward is good but with delight it feels
like it's just very much um in concert
with almost like who one is yeah you
know and and like I Delight in Costello
I don't expect everyone to Delight in
Costello people who did I delighted in
their Delight so it was just you know
amplifying all the Delight but the thing
that really strikes me about
Delight is that every example you gave
it's very rapid time scale M like you
you know like I will say I I normally
drink yamate during these things which I
Delight in but today I decided I haven't
had coffee in a while took a little
break from it for no particular reason
and I had a single shot of espresso and
I I was thinking to myself this is
really so this is a this is a fast time
skill maybe it was the fact I haven't
had it in a little while um and it's
just really fast no one suffers it's all
game and so it runs a little bit
countercurrent to we were talking about
before which is the requirement for
effort to precede the reward Delight
feels like a like a very smooth Road um
to a reward that's all net positive and
as you said these these Delights are
available throughout the day and it
doesn't it requires just noticing
something inside and outside whereas I
feel like with gratitude I love
gratitude practices the data are
incredible it is is anything but but but
squishy it was like real power tool for
shifting one's one's state of mind
that's clear from the literature but the
Gratitude thing I I feel like requires
an almost like a a formalization like
okay I'm going to be grateful now
whereas Delight you're just kind of on
the lookout for things that spark you
and make you um reflexively smile and
and and few things are better than that
yeah and I think it's really sensory you
know in the way we were talking about
before right it gets you back into being
present most of these Delights are
something you taste or you experience or
you see that's funny um there's a really
lovely book by the author Ross gay
called The Book of delights and and he
used a delight practice where every day
he not only had to find a delight but
write a short essay about it because
he's an author and it's just hilarious
it's like one of my favorite books and
you just kind of go and it's really
strange things it's like when ises he
you know notice the flower as he notices
lilacs and he has this whole idea of one
delay is purple flowers why are there so
many purple flowers there's purple
flowers everywhere he also has a delight
in music he really likes the' 8s band El
dear you know from the be of the r
familiar he talks about his love of De
and you can kind of have this connection
with other people's Delights and and
it's silly they're just silly things but
the fact that we've notice them I mean
again as a listener is probably
experiencing right now if you pay
attention little bit of positive emotion
right if you're driving around your car
feeling a little stressed out in traffic
you can kind of take a breath and so
that's the power of the practice you're
you're shifting your emotions because
you're noticing these good things you're
noticing the good things which is great
you're sort of training your attention
to get there and you're sort of forming
this habit to shift that negativity bias
that's sort of built in but isn't really
making you as happy as you could be I'd
like to take a quick break and thank one
of our sponsors David David makes a
protein bar unlike any other it has 28
gram of protein only 150 calories and0
gram of sugar that's right 28 gram of
protein and 75% of its calories come
from protein These Bars from David also
taste amazing my favorite flavor is
chocolate chip cookie dough but then
again I also like the chocolate fudge
flavored one and I also like the cake
flavored one basically I like all the
flavors they're incredibly delicious for
me personally I strive to eat mostly
Whole Foods however when I'm in a rush
or I'm away from home or I'm just
looking for a quick afternoon snack I
often find that I'm looking for a
highquality protein source with David
I'm able to get 28 grams of protein with
the calories of a snack which makes it
very easy to hit my protein goals of one
gram of protein per pound of body weight
each day and it allows me to do that
without taking in excess calories I
typically eat a David bar in the early
afternoon or even midafternoon if I want
to bridge that gap between lunch and
dinner I like that it's a little bit
sweet so it tastes like a tasty snack
but it's also giv me that 28 gram of
very high quality protein with just 150
calories if you would like to try David
you can go to
david.com huberman again the link is
david.com
huberman I've long been interested
in shifting one's emotions and when that
feels
good when it is good and when it doesn't
feel good um I asked our friend Ethan
cross about this too um I'm not going to
compare your answers as a as a template
for who's right who's wrong I think
there there are a lot a lot of differing
opinions on this but um I know from the
time we are young kids we don't like to
be shifted like we don't like people to
impose an emotional requirement on us in
fact my niece when she was little I was
telling her this she's 18 now she was
not amused um which which delighted me
that she was not amused but when she was
little she was um a
pretty healthily stubborn kid and um
you'd ask her to do anything like hey
let's go downstairs for a walk and she
loved going outside for walks and she'd
say no push me and then she would get
her stuff and then you'd go for a walk
but I loved her like no push me I love
this it was also Costello was like a
don't push me you couldn't um so there
was this like immediate vocalization
from the time she could speak really was
like no I'm going to decide how I feel
such a healthy thing too such a healthy
thing you're not going to shift me I
like we're going out for a walk it's
going to be fun and she's like no push
me and then she'd go for the walk most
of the times it was a fun walk but I
think that we we don't like to be
shifted MH and in some ways we don't
really like to shift ourselves like when
we're in a given emotion MH uh when
people are feeling upset like they don't
want to be told they should feel happy
yeah um and yet no one really wants to
be upset although there's this do you
know this result I don't want to um spin
off into it a long discussion about this
but Robert Heath a very controversial
neurosurgeon from the um like 70s and
80s did these experiments of stimulating
in different parts of the brain allowing
people to self-stimulate different parts
of their brain and all there were only
three subjects because it's a yeah inv
Vivo human neuros stimulation experiment
all three subjects by far their favorite
area to uh stimulate was this midline
Central nucleus midline midline thalamic
nucleus rather all three of them
reported that the The Sensation that
they would lever pressed the most for
was frustration and Mild anger mhm
humans like that excuse my language
Nega look the horror movie industry
would not exist if we didn't like fear
right the the honestly like Twitter X
whatever we're calling it now would not
exist if we didn't like outrage right
these are kind of complicated negative
emotions that have have some positive
benefit to us and I think that this is
something that people get wrong when
they hear my line of research you know I
tell people like oh I teach this class
about happiness at Yale and people will
say like oh you just want everybody to
be happy you sort of embrace this toxic
positivity and I'm like no no no toxic
positivity toxic positivity yeah it's
this idea I mean you kind of see it in
our culture right now it's the sort of
Good Vibes only right it's this idea
that anything that feels you know mildly
frustrating or like hard to do it's like
oh no no do that it's like Good Vibes
only right and there's this idea that if
you're experiencing negative emotions if
you feel sad or you feel a little lonely
or you feel a little upset at politics
whatever it is that something's wrong or
you got to take a pill or you got to do
something to fix it right and I think
that's a really dangerous idea right
because it's getting rid of this signal
that we've been built to experience
evolutionarily that's really important
right if you're experiencing outrage
that's telling you something super
crucial if you're experiencing kind of
frustration overwhelm is a big one if
you're kind of feeling oh I'm so
overwhelmed at work and I'm burned out
that's a really useful signal about
behavioral changes you should make um in
class I often tell my students that
negative emotions are like that that
dashboard on your car you know you go in
your car and you're like you know
sometimes you're driving the tire light
comes on or the engine light comes on
and and that's a pain in the ass
honestly because you're like well I got
to deal with it but so it's not fun when
these lights come on but it's super
useful information that if you actively
ignore it for months and months is going
to cause a much bigger your problem
later on and I think this is how all of
our negative emotions work you know if
you're feeling that you know negative
emotion of loneliness means you need
more social connection if you're feeling
overwhelmed it means probably got to
take something off your plate before you
burn out or get sick if you're feeling
sad like that's probably because of some
you know stimulus that matters that it's
like you're not there anymore if you're
feeling grief and so on I think too
often we just like want to get rid of
those we don't like them so we want to
suppress those emotions um but that but
suppressing our emotions is giv up
useful evolutionary information that
probably means we can take action to to
fix and feel better Americans might be
surprised to hear this but um I learned
this from my father who's from South
America he's from Argentina went to
British schools when he was young and he
told me when I was probably 10 or 12 I
can't remember exactly how old he said
you know in um in the British formal
school system if you act too happy
people accuse you of being
stupid mhm you to be to be gleeful or
happy yeah um and I said now I would say
Well they're perfectly fine being happy
when they're drinking I will say that
the afterwork um alcohol culture in lond
514 p.m. crowd they drink like I don't
know if it's still the case but they
drink a lot and then they get very like
outwardly happy but there's this idea um
and and this was true when I came into
Academia um that if somebody wasn't
super serious that they might be
stupid um and I think in the United
States now we tend to celebrate more
expressions of Glee um but that's
usually in the context of like celebrity
and wealth yeah like these people
getting on their private planes or
something but I think there's still some
elements to this that that we
internalize that um if you're happy that
you're not worrying about something if
you're not worrying about something then
you're ignoring the woes of the world
maybe even the your the threats that are
all around you and so we're some in some
ways we are conditioned to always want
to be happy that does seem to be one
message but then we also get the
conflicting message that to be happy is
to be ignorant of what's really
happening if not to you then to other
people and therefore you're not
fulfilling your role in society so who
are you to be happy all the time there's
a lot of judgment written into this
thing around happiness I'm realizing
yeah totally and and I think you're
you're bringing up something that I
actually worry about a lot right which
is is that hypothesis correct is it the
case that if you're feeling happy you
just ignore the woes and all the
terrible stuff in the world because then
I'm creating like you know a whole
generation of Yale students who are
going to not fix the bad problems of
life and so it turns out there's a
researcher at Georgetown Constantine
Kush who's tested this he actually asked
the question you know is it the case
that people who are experiencing more
positive emotion more satisfaction with
life do they ignore the problems of the
world and not act or are they the ones
kind of going out and doing stuff and so
he did this in a couple different
contexts he looked for social justice
causes I'll tell the the climate version
so he looked at how many people are
taking climate action so do you go to a
protest do you put solar panels on are
you donating money to climate causes and
he finds that the people who are really
climate anxious they tend to have less
positive emotions you're really worried
about climate change you tend to be more
on the depressed anxious side but if
you're doing stuff about it then you
tend to have more positive emotion um I
think he assumes that Cal arrow goes in
the other way that like if you're
happier if you're experiencing lots of
delights and positive emotion you kind
of have the bandwidth to do stuff right
you can go to that protest where if
you're super depressed you're just going
to like lie in bed with your duvet you
don't have the bandwidth to do this
stuff and so this old called kind of
like poly enish hypo is about happiness
it makes complete intuitive sense but if
you look at the data it's actually the
opposite which is a good thing because I
think it gives us a mandate not to stay
depressed about everything in the world
pissed off about what's happening yes
those negative emotions are good to to
notice and experience and act on but
like we can take care of ourselves and
it's okay it doesn't mean we're going to
stop doing good stuff in the world I
have a family member she's wonderful she
saves animals constantly um and she
knows that she has an excessive number
of animals um but she's from the East
Coast from New Jersey and the other day
she told me she goes you know I like
your podcast but you know sometimes you
have these guests on that are clearly
from the west coast and you guys get
into this real like West Coast
California squishy stuff and I just
can't listen to those and I said I won't
say her name but um for sake of privacy
but uh she said but you know I really
like it when um even if the topic is
about um something kind of uh squishy if
the person's from the East Coast then
like you know like I believe what
they're
saying and said and she goes yeah you
know out there you're into this and that
and I said well out there in New Jersey
you know language is kind of a weapon
she goes it's absolutely a weapon you
know so I do think there are these even
local cultural things like people from
the Midwest to me I don't want to you
know stereotype but they there's a every
time I go to the the Midwest I must say
there's a there's an etiquette people
are just so polite and kind so the the
level of of sort of mean level of
decency is much higher than it is say in
California in California there's some
other things that are wonderful that are
lacking elsewhere on the east coast and
so forth but yeah I I think one can
overgeneralize but I think that the
reason I raised this is that maybe we
all need to pay a little bit of
attention to the messages that we
internalized in our family and our
culture growing up and ask ourselves
whether or not our degree of happiness
or lack thereof is you know by some
programming yeah literally social
programming that we've internalized cuz
I I grew up in a home where um cynical
humor was rewarded uhhuh
and I've learned over the years in part
um through discussions with Jim Zaki and
and others like um I'm working on it uh
not all my humor cynical but I don't
like cynicism it bums me out it doesn't
feel good and I realize it doesn't feel
good I love Delight yeah but I don't
like cynicism that's just me and for the
cynics out there like cool do you do you
but um I think we have to pay attention
to kind of like where our set point is
with this stuff cuz some people are like
sitting real in the no push me and they
want to be unhappy yeah right we're
heading up on the holidays here so like
Scrooge MH right and other people
they're not feeling good they want to be
happy and then other people really are
just like no worries I mean down in
Australia it's all no worries and what
do they say in um Costa Rica I always oh
uh Pur yeah which means it's like like
the you good life you know chill life
everyone was just telling each other
like how great life should be all day
long yeah yeah I mean I think you're
getting at a really important issue
right which is like do we have a
happiness set point and kind of if we do
where does it come from right in your
example you know of kind of growing up
cynically and having these kind of
cynical messages it could be that that
was some sort of you know maybe
epigenetic thing right you're around all
these people that are cynical and you
learn how to do it right but it it could
be more of the like genetic side maybe
there's some pre-programmed you know
sense of your negativity bias or
something you know we don't have great
answers to those things but it's
definitely true that our place really
shapes kind of a lot of our tendencies
that matter for happiness um we know
this from some of the like local kind of
place things that you said I think you
my my in-laws are from the Midwest and
like yeah I toally they're just like
great decent kind happy people they
listening right now like I don't know
you I'm trying to train to be like you
they're wonderful um but but we also
know from like even more macro level
right so for now for decades the world
happiness report in collaboration with
the Gallup survey has been surveying
happiness of people across the world
right and they come up with these like
really consistent country level
differences in happiness um the US for a
very wealthy country is like not very
happy we're pretty low on the scale and
in fact in the most recent World
happiness report we dipped like below
like the top 10 like we kind of had this
major kind of dive for the first time
who the happiest uh Scandinavians so
it's usually Denmark I love going to
Denmark yeah they're very very very
happy so they tend to be happy and so we
can ask the question what's the
difference maybe it's you know the great
Scandinavian genes probably not it's
actually a lot of their cultural
practices which build on the sorts of
things talking about you know take
social connection right there's um a lot
less work hours so people can go home
and hang out with their family there's a
huge culture of clubs for example in
Denmark where people go off and do
sporting things a lot of Fitness right
um and the structure is to kind of get
that Fitness right like nobody expects
you to be at work so you can go you know
ski or work out or hang out I will say
they're very effective when they work
they're very proficient I mean I struck
by the like average level of um
operational and intellectual
intelligence of somebody like the person
your waiter in Denmark is an awesome
waiter yeah like and often times has
very interesting things to say like the
level of proficiency and the level of
focus when they are working is immensely
high so they're not just like kicking
back all day no and I and I think in
part it's a different attitude towards
work that there's a time for work but
you don't let your work e kind of like
leak into other things um there's this
woman Helen Russell uh who wrote a book
about the happiness in Denmark or the
Danish path of happiness I think is the
name of the book um and she had this
quote of like she was talking to people
in Denmark um and there's often a thing
that will happen where your manager has
to talk to you at work and give you
feedback and it's in part because you're
not leaving work on time you're there
over time and they want to have a
conversation with you like what's your
problem why can't you finish your work
in the aot at hours which again to
American years is like what your manager
would never say that I love it I love it
but that's that's the social thing but
but country level uh happiness is also
affected by some of the thought patterns
we talked about like the you know the
Scandinavians even though like cold and
dark and nothing like it's here in
California with you right now they take
joy in these tiny moments this idea of
Huga right h y gge Hugo where you notice
the warmth of your coffee or have these
candles or things it's a it's a society
that's really focused on presence in a
really rich way I love that my like I
said my father's Latin he's from
Argentina and he married a Danish woman
and and I would say much of their life
is about um cherishing and delighting in
these these these small things yeah um
the everyday things yeah um I think
that's dare I say I think that's one of
their major points of convergence I know
I'm sure there are others but that's a
major point of convergence I think you
know growing up in the United
States I sort of internalized this idea
that you know you're supposed to figure
out who you know who you are and go do
big things you know like um that was the
message that I internalized part of that
was the high school I went to a super
competitive high school and um kind of
people like tended to surround myself by
but um yeah I think for some of us the
effort is in trying to learn to
appreciate the little things having a
dog and I'm we have to talk about dogs
because you you've actually studied dogs
um extensively dogs non-human primates
in in a natural setting and um and the
other uh Old World primates humans um
you know people talk about how dogs are
just present they're not thinking about
the past they're not thinking about the
future I'd like to challenge that just
for a second is theic in me this is the
scientist in me and I'm genuinely
curious how do we know that dogs aren't
thinking a little bit about the past or
the walk they're going to take later
that afternoon do do we know I mean they
have a prefrontal cortex that can
anticipate things they have a memory
system they have a hippocampus and a
cortex that can remember things so how
do we know that our dog isn't sitting
there you know yes trying to glean as
much Sunshine as they can on their belly
through the through the uh through the
window but maybe they're thinking like
gosh like when are they going to finish
doing what whatever it is they're doing
so we can go outside and play ball yeah
it's such a hard question it's such a
hard question and I mean I think it's
one that every dog owner has really
wondered about right um I mean I've
thought about this question actually
more in the monkeys right who you know
we can fight about dog neurobiology and
they've got some of the stuff but like
they're kind of distinct like tiny you
know Walnut brains rather than like Prim
dogs have I let's just say that well
first of all dogs have as far as I know
one of the most dramatic ranges in body
size within a given uh species of animal
so Chihuahua Great Dane I think it's the
dosing of igf1 that regulates body size
and dogs it's a beautiful cover of
Science magazine that we can put a link
to with a chahua and a Great Dane and
it's just like whoa same species um but
they have relatively small brains
relative to their body weight size
regardless and if you look at the what
the brain's doing a lot of it is sensory
I mean a lot of it's all Factory right
it's not the ruminative thinking about
stuff that we kind of have like expanded
a lot in the primate brain you know not
a lot of front prefrontal Cort lot of
prefrontal stuff right before behind
your forehead folks is this is the part
that allows um you to say sh to your
impulses to quiet your impulse suppress
them and also um context dependent
learning and planning so what to do what
to say what not to do what not to say in
a given environment there's a lot in
your brain about that that is you know
controlled by so-called executive
function the sort of conductor of the
whole thing and you're saying dogs dogs
have a pretty limited real estate
they're limited and if you think about
what that real estate does you know it
can kind of do that shush you know it
can take you out of the moment but
they're kind of related parts of you
know kind of Cortex close by that's
doing a lot of the work of thinking
about past episodes thinking about what
other people are thinking thinking about
counterfactuals like not this is what
humans are doing this is what humans are
doing like the human big version of this
right um and this is the kind of stuff
that gets us into trouble when it comes
to presents I think the dogs walking
around it's like you know I don't know
what it's sniffing like hydrant hydrant
do you know like dog dog person person
and I think it's there because it
doesn't have as much circuitry to be
like well this hydrant is not exactly as
good as the other hydrant I smelled
before like what would you know Bob the
other dog be thinking of this hydrant
right now I think or they're still
laughing at so and so from the dog park
incident two weeks ago right so much of
human um negative interaction is like um
humans
exchanging good and bad information
about other humans oh totally it's like
kind of the basis of not all but a lot
of social media yeah and a lot of our
rumination is US thinking about the
other information that people have about
us right you know kind of we have no
idea what exactly yeah and so you know I
often think about this so in Buddhist
circles um there's this discussion of
the monkey Mind by which they mean the
part of your mind that when you're
trying to be present and focus on the
moment especially in practices like
meditation kind of runs off somewhere
that's your monkey mind running off and
you to kind of yank it back by the tail
or something and I've always thought
that was a real kind of unnecessary dis
to monkeys because my sense is at least
at least the Reese's monkeys which is
the species I worked with they seem a
lot more like dogs than humans you know
I I work with this group of monkeys on a
a field in a field site called Kaio
Santiago it's this island off the coast
of Puerto Rico and it's home to a
thousand Freer ranging reesus monkey so
we can do our studies and just kind of
walk around with these monkeys who are
kind of living freely and you see them
and they just you know I'll sometimes
sit near a monkey who's like sitting
there looking out into the ocean and
just sitting there and I'm like I bet
what's going on in his head is not that
human Buddhist version of the monkey
mind where he's like what about this
ocean when do I have to go home I have
to cook something oh what did my husband
say to me it's not that I think the
monkeyy version is just like ocean ocean
like it's just it's just there or even
or even better like Costello I used to
look at him and and think what's going
on in that brain of his and then I
realized it's probably and this is a
neurophys I wouldn't consider myself a
neurophysiologist but I've done some
certainly a fair number of recordings
from the the live brain and I'm guessing
most of what was in there is what we
call Hash not the drug
back that's the sound on the Audio
Monitor when's no clean signal toise I'm
guessing just hash
like I I wonder if the term monkey
mind well here I'll just come clean I
always thought that monkey mind was this
image of a little monkey swinging from
tree to tree and that it's the um
adjective uh uh sort of superimposed on
the human brain so excuse me it's the
it's the verb of the of the moving
monkey um transformed into an adjective
um judgment about the human brain so so
sad if you're a monkey like I think if
monkeys had frontal cortex and talk to
us would be like don't blame us for your
like it's the human brain part of the
brain that brain yeah exactly you know
somebody who really appreciates Raptors
and um diving birds think about the
computations diving birds have to do
they have to adjust for the refractory
index of the water so where they see the
fish is not where the fish is and um you
know so when people say bird brain I'm
like get me started on forid cognition
those guys are the smartest yeah
smartest guys so monkeys but but you're
making me realize I always thought
Reese's Maxs which are Old World
primates like us or we're like
them that they had a fair amount of
prefrontal real estate in their brain
such that they could think and
strategize and plan I mean if one just
watches one episode of that Netflix
special which I love um which is chimp
Empire mhm there's all this stuffff
about who's in power and then they're
going to team up and then they're going
to wait a few days until that one's
injured and then they're not going to
groom the other one and boom there's an
over I mean like very complicated it's
chess not Checkers for for Old World
primates yeah I think there could be a
big distinction between what chimpanzees
are doing I mean they're our closest you
know tied with bonobo is our closest
living relative you know that was what
like 30 million you know like wasn't so
long right whereas rees's monkeys are
pretty far off right I think there could
be a lot of things that happened um in
between and and we know that not
necessarily from the neurobiology
because it's hard to ask kind of
functional neurobiology questions with
animals you can't kind of put them in
fmri where they're doing Behavior as
easily as you can with a human um but we
know it from cognition studies that look
at things like you know how good are say
reesus monkeys at perspective taking at
kind of taking on someone else's beliefs
knowing oh somebody's thinking something
theory of mind yeah thinking something
different that I'm thinking um and
they're not so hot at it they really use
their own perspective to make judgments
pretty well same thing when we look at
cases of like counterfactual thinking
you know do do you have regret over an
outcome that you didn't get right
something that reesus monkeys find kind
of hard right so it seems like they're
very good at sophisticatedly planning in
the present moment right you know you
and I are talking here right now if
you're watching the video you can see I
have a cup like I might be planning to
pick up the cup right but the cups here
everything I'm not simulating what if
this was a lovely martini right that
that's the kind of thing that probably a
human can do really well but a monkey
can't so they can kind of plan and take
Next Step actions when there's around
the world that they experience but they
can't simulate worlds that are totally
different and that includes the kind of
complicated stuff going on in somebody
else's head so they're good at
short-term strategy this fits with um
what a friend of mine who studies
behavior in macx told me which is that
you can set up a really nice complicated
onp paper perfect experiment where the
monkey is going to inform you about some
important feature of how the brain works
in terms of Behavioral economics or
something but then what you realize is
or what the monkey realizes even if it
doesn't consciously realize is
that no matter what they're going to get
reward 50% of the time on average and
they'll just hit the lever or give an
answer as fast as they can so they get
that day's ration of reward and just
that's the end of the day and so they're
not cheating they're just like why would
I work any harder than this to actually
do the experiment you want me to do and
so what many primate behavioral
researchers end up becoming are monkey
trainers oh yeah I mean the bane of
every animal researcher existence this
is whether you test dogs monkeys rodents
whatever is what are called side biases
what's a side bias it's you're giving an
animal a choice between A and B one A's
on the left B's on the right and rather
than think through these complicated
things you want them to Think Through
they're just like whatever hey left I'll
go left left left left left left and
you're like no I know you get rewarded
50% of the time but I had this really
creative question I wanted you to pay
attention and they just don't care they
don't care well they're or or or they're
getting rewarded enough at 50% that you
have to do something like what what
researchers in the FI I mean now we're
getting really in the trenches called
breaking a side bias we're like no I'm
going to give more reward at B if you're
only going to left then I'm going to
give more reward at right we move them
and stuff but it does often seem to be
the case that the monkeys are training
us more than we trading the monkeys
so I Delight in that a little bit I
confess just a little bit just a tiny
bit um I mean I I'll I'll share one
story that that kind of gets it you know
this sort of perspective taking how good
they are that they are good when it's
kind of what's in the here and now right
um we were doing these studies um on the
island which involved was showing
monkeys some food and we had these these
eggplants in a box that we were making
the monkeys look at for various reasons
we couldn't find a monkey to test on
this island you have to kind of hike
around until you find a monkey who's
kind of chilled out and whatever and we
had hiked around the whole Mount the
whole island it was taking forever we
get back to our starting location and
there's there's an eggplant that's
sitting there we're like where' that
where' that eggplant come from and we're
like and it's got like bite marks out of
it we're like how did that and it was
like wait a minute somebody must have
stolen my eggplant and we're like well
how did that happen like we were like we
were paying attention to the monkeys the
whole time we realized like no no no
they must have stolen it when we were
like we probably put it down for a
second and like they took it like we
didn't drop it it was like and so it was
like we iiz like oh not only are they
good at stealing but they can tell like
if we're looking at it but looking is
something that you know all animals pay
attention to gaze like you know this is
the kind of thing that even you know
insects pay attention to right that's
why they have these kind of markings
that look like eyes so that birds won't
eat them and stuff gaze following is
really robust but that's different than
that monkey thinking I bet that person's
not looking it's probably like no eyes I
can grab it right but if you look kind
of more sophisticatedly they're not good
at it but this was another case of
realizing like oh the monkeys are
actually a lot smarter than than we give
them credit for and maybe us too yeah so
what we're talking about is they are
good at um figuring out the basic rules
MH maybe even up to the level of what
you call in computer programming and
Gates if this and that are happening
then I go right if that and that are not
happening then I don't do anything and
if that and a third option are happening
well then I go left yeah um and if all
three are happening it doesn't matter
like they can probably figure out you
know two or three levels of and Gates
but what they can do is simulate all
these various situations I mean the
amazing thing about being a human is I
could you know I could imagine any
scenario imagine like 700 podcast
listeners jumped on this table right now
you know imagine if the table was orange
like imagine if you were I don't know
another podcaster you're Malcolm
Gladwell or whatever like I more hair
true I mean I can simulate all these
infinite different things to try to
program that so hard but it comes to us
as humans in seconds it's so fast and
it's the kind of thing that we use all
the time honestly it's it's the basis of
a lot of our happiness look at you know
the fiction that we engage in right you
we're constantly paying deep and close
attention to fictional worlds I've cared
more about some fictional worlds than
I've cared about my own family members
sorry family members but it's true right
like you're reading a novel and you're
like I'm crying I'm balling I'm cheering
for these people that I know are
completely made up because our brains
just kind of dive into into these sort
of fake worlds these alternative worlds
so easily and so quickly so powerfully I
definitely want to continue along the
dimension of how we construct our
happiness but I just want to make sure
that I ask again about
dogs um and and you know let's let's
just do this because you know I know
it's so politically dangerous but let's
talk about the dog versus cat thing yeah
you know my sister loves cats I don't
dislike cats but that doesn't mean I
like them I once rented a place where
there was a big cat I think it was one
of these manun cats his name was Baloo
they're basically do he's basically a
dog and Costello had certain cat-like
qualities like he just wanted to Lounge
all day he could really move like a dog
but most of the time he was kind of like
a cat at home and it was frustrating for
me but I mean what do what do you think
it is you know you have these feline
people and you have dog people and I'm
definitely in the dog camp but one of
the reasons I love dogs is I assume
they're in the Pres
but mostly it's the unconditional love
but what do you think it is this dog cat
thing I mean cats are presumably in the
present as well yeah um they don't make
long-term plans and if they do they
don't actualize those plans so why is it
that some people feel that cats are like
nasty animals that are plotting against
them and some people Delight in cats
yeah they don't have great data on it
but my sense is it gets back to the
unconditional love idea the cat like if
you're the kind of person who craves the
unconditional love you wind up being
more of a dog person yes but if you like
the what was it that your your uh was it
your niece yeah my niece yeah what was
it your niece said this like no push
meat she used to hold her finger up yeah
like say going cats are a lot more no
push me unless we said we were going for
ice cream it was no push me and I
remember and I still Delight in it
thinking like awesome she had just I
mean like she had such a strong Spirit
from the time she you might like cats
cuz cats are a lot like no push me and I
think I think this is that I don't want
a cat well I think I think the like
removal of the sort of no push me might
be one of the last stages of evolution
and domestication of dogs and I know
this because in my dog work we also did
some very fun work with dingos which are
the Australian wild dogs and we don't
fully know their history our sense is
like those dogs kind of like got pretty
close to humans pretty tolerant of
humans but didn't go like all the way to
Costello in terms of the bond um and one
of the amazing things we get interacted
with this group at a sanctuary for dingo
out in Australia um one of the only sets
of genetic pure dingos in the world with
this wonderful privilege to work with
but we kind of had to like do our keep
at these field stations so we kind of
went in and you know helped cleaned up
with the dingo and so on and uh every
morning you'd go out and you'd give the
dingo their food which are these big
kind of chickens um and they would just
I mean they just kind of raw chickens
not live chickens but they'd just like
Chomp it in one gulp just like bones and
all and you're like whoa and then right
after that they'd want to be kind of oh
come on nudge me be nice it was like a
cat in its best move but then at a
certain point they were just like like
no like I'll stop they just had like
such their own will in this really
amazing way and it just felt incredibly
catlike I'm like you look like a dog but
your behavior is so much more cat-like
so so I don't know no great studies on
this it'd be great to kind of figure it
out but my sense is distinction between
dog people and Cat people might be the
unconditional love no push me ratio of
what people like so interesting and um I
like to think did not take us too far
off course in our discussion about
happiness because we clearly Delight in
this and y people do too is that we
think about the different the different
brain architectures and the different
capabilities the different brain
architectures have across species um and
the fact that we live in such close
proximity to some of these species is
wild when I was growing up not everyone
had a dog unless they had the space for
it now I feel like dogs are everywhere
yeah I mean it's like such an enormous
billion dollar industry to have dogs and
it raises a question that kind of gets
us back to some of the happiness work
like which is is that a good idea right
all these people are investing their
time their energy their space and dogs
you know you could ask the question do
they make us happier and I know you they
do yeah don't I'm not going to break
everybody's heart we've killed the cat
people and the dog no pet dogs in
particular but pets in general um wind
up making us happier pet owners are
statistically happier um and I think
it's for a couple of reasons based on
the stuff we just talked about you know
take the behavioral pattern that matters
social connection for sure dogs provide
that social connection themselves you
know we just talked about they tap into
your caregiving system and so on but as
you talked about in your interactions
with like you know Bulldog pleading you
know like Bulldog you know what was the
phrase you used when you see a bulldog
and you say Bulldog something oh I when
I see somebody with a bulldog I just say
um excuse me there's a bulldog tax and
then I and then I pet their Bulldog good
let me go if you're going to meet a
bulldog just understand they're they're
shaped like a beer keg so they can't
scratch themselves on their on their
hind quarters so if you give them a
scratch there they're like thank you
because it's got to be a just awful it's
like having that scratch in the middle
of your back and you can't reach it so
you do you you do the Bulldog text and
you have this nice social connection
with the Bulldog but my guess is and
because you're using verbal language you
also connected with the person you
probably say oh my gosh what's his name
oh when did you get him blah blah blah
that's chatting with the briest at the
coffee shop right that's doing the you
know Nick ebl experiments we just talked
about before pets wind up bringing us
social connection um and one of the
pieces of advice if you're feeling
lonely is get an animal not just so that
the animal will give you some comfort
but you know it's particularly with a
dog you got to walk that animal and then
people talk to you it's much easier to
connect with people when you have dogs
so social connection is huge um second
thing is you know particularly again for
dogs um what are people doing they're
getting out and walking right so we're
getting some people who never had a lot
of physical exercise before are at least
getting the kind of walks they need to
do in for the dog and even if they won't
choose to do it for themselves they
often choose to do it for their dog so
you get you know exercise in which is
good for physical health and we haven't
talked about but is enormously good for
happiness meta analyses showing you know
half hour of cardio exercise exercise a
day is as good as a anti-depression
medication for reducing symptoms of
depression so just that walk with your
dog is great but beyond that I think
they help our thought patterns right and
this is true for dogs I think and cats
right where you know as you're were
saying we're wondering what they're
doing sometimes if they're sitting there
and we're just petting them what we're
doing is we're sitting there and we're
petting them so they give us these
wonderful sensory experiences and I
think they cause us to be a little bit
more present especially when we're kind
of interacting with them you know we're
interacting with our dogs unless you're
taking the Instagram pictures of the dog
but usually when you're playing with the
dog or what ever it's you're just there
you're not on your phone you're just
kind of mindfully experiencing life with
your dog kind of like when you talked
about your road trip you know part of
what probably brought you into the
present moment especially if your
girlfriend was working was like that the
dog was interacting with you so the dogs
help us not because they're inherently
kind of Happiness inducing they help us
take these boxes of better behaviors for
happiness better thought patterns for
happiness and they're kind of a delight
so they kind of give us some positive
emotion
too I love all of that I just want to um
double click uh if it were on this idea
that they can be a bridge for social
connection that's really powerful a
friend of mine who used to smoke
cigarettes who doesn't any longer um in
fact I remember when I was a postto at
Stanford that like the mostly the
foreign post talks but they used to
gather outside and have Cigar cigarette
breaks all the time now you're not
allowed to smoke on the medical school
campus and I think probably on the main
campus too most places you're not
allowed to smoke out right because of
secondhand smoke any any in any case but
um but he said to me you know it used to
be that um before people either knew or
fully internalized how bad smoking was
is that asking for a cigarette or
sharing a cigarette side by side with
somebody was a way that people engaged
in casual interaction not just outside
of bars not just to meet potential mates
Etc but it was just it was a bridge you
know you can walk up to somebody and say
you know like we call it like buming a
smoke like you ask for a cigarette or
you if someone was smoking you could go
stand by them and also smoke yeah and so
is this terribly Health diminishing
habit but it served as a lot of social
lubricant yeah it also it also gives you
another behavior that we know is really
important for happiness which is time um
there's a lot of social science research
on this phenomena that's called time
affluence which is a sort of subjective
sense that you feel wealthy in time you
kind of just have a break right you get
a like a smoking break is one of these
right you get a break and often people
you know back in the day when smoking
was allowed one of the ways that you got
your breakes often in not so great
workplaces was like you could ask for a
smoke break my mom talks about this she
was a a teacher educator for a super
long time where you don't get a lot of
breaks but you know back in the 70s if
you're a smoker they'd let you go
outside for 10 minutes and that was a
sort of break right so I think this
other unhealthy habit kind of gave us
the opportunity to take breaks which we
know are great for happiness and so
great for happiness that if you don't
have any of this so-called time
affluence is sense that you have some
free time if you experience what
researchers called time famine where you
feel like almost starving for time it's
a huge hit on your well-being if you
self-report these surveys being time
famished so I don't have time to meet up
with my friends I never have time for
the stuff I want to do that's as big a
hit on your well-being as if you
self-report being unemployed you know
listeners if you lost you have a job and
you lost it tomorrow you'd probably
think of that as a big hit in your
happiness just not having any time for
the little breaks in life is as bad wow
and this gets back to our earlier
discussion about money and happiness
which is researcher Ashley willins at
Harvard Business School has kind of
pushed the idea that what's going on
with these you know low income folks who
have a real hit on happiness right not
having a high income hurt your happiness
her theory is a lot of that actually has
to do with time because if you have a
really low income you don't have a car
to get to work so you're taking the bus
and it's taking you forever you're
working multiple jobs right that a lot
of the reason that money affects
happiness and not having money affects
happiness is that it co-varies with not
having time and the real hit on our
happiness is just the time part more so
than the money part so we need to be in
pursuit of things we need to work um but
we also need some free time we can't
have too much free time or too much work
basically and The Sweet Spot is often
hard to maintain or even know what what
that sweet spot is yeah I think this
this term kind of time affence and what
researchers mean by is helpful here
right it's the subjective sense that you
have some free time it's not I
objectively go into your calendar and
you show me how many open blocks there
are it's your sense that you have a
break and this provides an interesting
hack that we can use to get more of it
right which is that we can kind of just
frame things as is having more time um
you know cuz sometimes when you get a
break that you don't expect it can feel
like a lot um I teach this uh class
about happiness on y's campus and I talk
about time affluence it's one of the
topics in my class and I always felt
that was really ironic because our young
people today especially at you know
Elite College institutions are so time
famished they're running from thing to
thing and have a million
extracurriculars and so on so I feel
will like I'm going to lecture them for
an hour on time affluence and tell them
all these studies and so what I did was
uh they in the syllabus as said there's
a lecture on time affluence and they
come to class and I have my teaching
assistants that are handing out little
Flyers that say today's you know like
lectures about time affluence and to
teach you what that is I'm going to give
you some no class today so you didn't
know you walked to class now you got a
free hour and a half and it just
happened to be one of these unusually
warm you know like California esque days
in New Haven where it was like sunny out
so kids you know got a bubble tea with
their friend or some of them went on a
hike near the like local you know State
Park and one of the students I remember
burst in a tear is when she got this
this form and she said uh this is the
first free hour and a half I've had for
like the last three months you know wow
um that stress they're that stress but
what I find interesting about this is
like I didn't give them a month off
vacation right I gave them an hour back
unexpectedly and it felt like it was
huge and Andrew I don't know your
schedule but sometimes my schedule can
be so overwhelmed and so packed that you
know there's a half hour meeting that
gets canceled I'm just like and like
their relief I feel like I could learn a
new language I could you know like you
just feel like but it's a half hour
right and I think this is a hack we can
use for ourselves right you know
listeners right now go on your calendar
a few months from now and just like you
know take like you know months months
away pick an hour period and just write
in like huberman lab time affluence and
just don't put anything in that and my
guess is when you get to that hour that
you've scheduled months later you'll be
like oh my gosh this feels great we can
kind of gift ourselves these little
Windows of time um another hack we can
do is to make good use of the free time
we do have and this is kind of a puzzle
is something that I found unexpected
when I saw the data on this which is
that turns out we actually have more
free time now than we did like 10 15
years ago if you add it up not just kind
of postco but in general we've been
getting more free time however the free
time we have is cut up differently it's
in smaller chunks it's like five minutes
when that Zoom meeting ends a little
earlier 10 minutes if your kid falls
asleep early or whatever it is and we
don't think it's that much so we just
kind of blow it but if you add it up it
winds up more than people in past
decades have had and probably like good
time that we could use for stuff and so
these little chunks of time are what the
journalist Bridget schul calls time
confetti which I think is such a great
image of it it's this little you know
five minutes here and there but you can
do a lot with those minutes if you add
them up um we just have to use them a
little bit more intentionally right and
that could be you know for some of the
stuff you talk about in this podcast a
lot like use that t you do the seven
minute New York Times workout you know
do do the kinds of things we're talking
about you know that's the time you text
your friend and have a delay or get some
sunlight get some sunlight
outside right walk in sunlight huge
problem is what do we do when we get the
time confetti or I mean what do I do
when I'm in a bad moment pull out our
phone check our email scroll through
it's like again this sort of neutr sweet
dopamine hit that's not being effective
so if you feel really overwhelmed and
you objectively don't have a lot of time
remember that the time confetti that you
already have it's already sitting there
can be really valuable if you use it
well super important um because I think
the filling of those spaces with
what I love the analogy to neutr or
artificial sweeteners is it's going to
taste like it's providing some sort of
nourishment but it's um probably just
creating a more sense of craving and
want at some level would really like to
talk about reward circuitry just
thematically um listeners of this
podcast and even if they've never heard
one of these podcasts before um probably
familiar with the word dopamine we've
talked about it a bit and as we were
talking about earlier everything about
the dopamine reward circuitry which of
course includes other chemicals too is
based on prior experience relative to
current experience relative to
anticipated outcom what sometimes
referred to as reward prediction error
think something Great's going to happen
something great happens great think
something Great's going to happen
something less than great happens sucks
way more Yep than you would anticipate
think that something not so great is
going to happen something so so great
happens huge reward not novelty surprise
brings the positive novelty and and
surprise brings the biggest
rewards and this is what I would like to
kind of paint as the backdrop think
about it as a conceptual mural behind us
as I asked the
question maybe just
maybe we're not supposed to be happy all
the time or maybe even all that often
mhm and when we're feeling not so great
or even lousy ided it's not dangerous
levels of
depression maybe we should frame that as
the backdrop for the greater happiness
that will come when we start to emerge
from that lousy State yeah now some
people could say well now you're just
kind of using neurobiology to you know
twist around what would otherwise be a
lousy experience and tell me that it's
good for me no uh what I'm trying to say
is you know people want to be happy I
think we'd all love to be happy all the
time but we're not wired to be happy all
the time and maybe the feelings of
Happiness can't exist unless they have
contrast with these neutral or negative
emotion states that we call I don't know
feeling lousy feeling anxious Etc and
just I realize I can pose long questions
but I just want to provide a little bit
more context for the moment which is
that every circuit in the brain our
ability to see light literally depends
on the contrast with the so-called off
circuitry which is the circuitry in our
visual system that perceives dark we
need contrast to be able to see light
mhm everything's Push Pull hunger
satiety cold heat perception um go no go
it's all Push Pull circuitry in there
why wouldn't happiness have a pushpull
relationship with unhappiness or at
least neutral affect yeah well I think
it does I mean you're giving a
neurobiological explanation for what
psychologists in this field of positive
psychology have referred to is what's
called hedonic adaptation is a fancy way
of saying we get used to stuff um you
know you like grab the you know
delicious ice cream cone I know we Hub
we do a delicious salad really healthy
but it's tasty healthy tasty salad right
start eating it first bite is like this
is awesome I'm so into it it's great
bite number two a little bit less
awesome little bit less by the 10th bite
it's not because you're full or you're
like you know feeling disgusted it's
just like that sensory experience you've
gotten used to it right it's just no
longer as interesting walk into a bakery
yeah exactly it smells amazing spend 5
minutes in the bakery 10 minutes in the
bakery you attenuate you habituate which
is great I mean you wouldn't maybe want
to be firing your your neurons would get
all exhausted and stuff but it's in in
one way terrible for happiness in
another way very good for happiness but
in a major way terrible for happiness
which is the following every good thing
in life if it sticks around becomes kind
of boring over time you just kind of
used to it um I use the example
sometimes of you know the last time the
first time your partner said I love you
or if you had a kid the first time your
kid said mommy or daddy that
feels amazing right but like you know
last week my husband said I love you
it's like whatever I'm just used to it
right you know last week when your kid
was like I love you mom like you know
Mommy like you don't care right the most
amazing thing in life if it gets
repeated just becomes boring and that
sucks because you know you like the most
amazing things in life to kind of keep
being awesome it's pretty sad that we
don't have it right this has a lip side
though which is very good for happiness
hedonic adaptation which is the most
terrible thing in life can happen and
over time you get used to that too you
know so your partner breaks up with you
um you find out you have a chronic
disease right just something like really
bad happens day one when you find out
that piece of information it is awful
but day two yeah still awful but that's
just your life and then over time it
kind of gets better um a very famous
study in the field of Happiness science
that tried to look at this with um
people who experienced a really great
event in theory uh winning the lottery
um and people who experienced really bad
events real events in life um becoming
paraplegic so you used to be able to
walk and now you've lost the use of your
legs you survey happiness um in people
who haven't had these experiences and
you ask predict how bad it would be to
have this and people say you know a day
one of winning the lottery would be
really great and you know a year from
now a year from that point winning
lottery would still be just as great
it'd be awesome same thing with
paraplegic you know you're you know
moment you become paraplegic that day is
a really crappy Thursday but a year from
then is still just as crappy and what
you find is people you know on the day
you become paraplegic or the day you win
your lottery like that a big shift in
your contrast right you know the day you
win the lottery is an awesome Thursday
day you become paraplegic is terrible
but a year from then it turns out your
happiness is no different from baseline
from the day before that event happened
right statistically um and that is
shocking right like I know these results
I can quote the paper but like if you
told me today laori you you know you
walk out of Studio you get hit by a car
your paraplegic how would you feel in
2026 I'd be like my life is still really
crummy um but statistically that's just
not going to happen what does that mean
that's kind of good news about hedonic
adaptation for happiness that means the
worst thing possible could happen to you
and you have all these processes that
are just going to get used to it over
time and it's going to be okay and I
think this is an important aspect of our
psychology that we forget I think
sometimes we have opportunities to do
things in life that are a little risky
something we might try out that we might
screw up or fail at or that we'll be bad
at at first and we don't do it because
we're scared we're making a prediction
like oh well if I failed or if I screwed
that up you know I'd just be unhappy but
actually all these mechanisms that we
have of hedonic adaptation means those
things aren't going to affect you for as
long as you think so I think the
contrast hypothesis about happiness is
real um good things don't stay good
things over time um but the bad things
don't either and so but we still want
the good things to stay good over time
and so that raises a question of of how
we can do that um and Liz Dunn whose
work I've mentioned before she likes to
use this phrase that scarcity Engineers
happiness right um one thing we can do
is space out the good things in life you
know so if I was having that really
delicious healthy salad with the avocado
whatever if I had that every day it
would stop being good um but if I had it
very very infrequently it would still be
good every time I come back to it and so
some some sometimes oddly the way we
make ourselves happier is to kind of
remove positive experiences especially
extreme positive experiences um kind of
space them out so we can kind of come
back to them over time I definitely
agree with that I also and forgive me
folks but I think I understand why um
dogs are so awesome they don't attenuate
to
reward MH you tell them they're going to
get this little piece of amazing
whatever beef jerky or something and
they like yes then second trial yes
third trial yes I mean presumably at
some point they reached satiety or
fatigue but there's something about
their reward Pathways that they don't
seem to attenuate much and there's a if
there's feedback to us on that it's like
okay okay you know it's great that
they'll keep um delighting in the simple
little things it seems like almost as
much as the the first time yeah we are
not like that it's interesting no to my
knowledge people haven't studied honic
adaptation in dogs but it's a really
good question but but we are not like
that for most things um and this is this
this sucks right I mean it's also the
case that in addition to kind of getting
used to stuff over time um it's also
showing a different feature which is
sort more particular contrast feature
you're talking about so we over time we
kind of habituate that's one sort of
neural mechanism but another is the one
that you mentioned which is about the
contrast right and that's what you see
kind of you see both of them say in the
light perception right if I show you the
same light over time you're going to
habituate that's Hedon literally for
folks listening uh it literally
disappears yes if I set up the right
experiment um Russ and Karen dallo at
Berkeley years ago did these beautiful
experiments you you look at like a
grading of light projected onto a wall
and if you can stabilize the eyes so
that they're not moving
around the it literally will disappear
and same thing with an odor same thing
with touch right like I wasn't thinking
about my contact happiness my delicious
habituation attenuation these These are
technical terms when you really get down
into it and the push pull antagonism
between um light and dark this smell yes
no on off push all of it Go noo every
single aspect of the nervous system
functions this way flexor flexor
extensor in the muscle skeletal system
but that gets to maybe what I would
think of as different so hedonic
adaptation is the same stimulus over
time like almost like habituation
there's a different thing that happens
when you get what you might call a
contrast um and there's all kinds of
visual illusions that sort of function
on this if you've ever seen the one
where it's like you is it the same color
over here over here we throw this on
your show page to show people and it's
like oh it looks different it's like no
no no that's because of the the kind of
contrast between the two things you see
something that's really bright over here
it makes something else look a little
darker right um that's a different
negative effect on our happiness a lot
of the time this is the comparison
effect right this is like you know my
$50 million seems kind of crappy because
I hang out with people who you know have
hundred million doar objectively have a
tremendous amount of money but I feel
bad because I'm kind of comparing
against something else and so often time
when we're evaluating different rewards
we're kind of comparing them against
what other people had or what we've had
in the past and that means that being in
an objectively good situation might feel
really crappy if you just have somebody
else that has a slightly better
objectively good situation my favorite
example of this actually comes from the
Sports World um so researchers asked
this interesting question like how happy
are you when you win an Olympic medal
right you're on the stand you won an
Olympic medal and also who's happiest so
gold medalist is up there best in the
world you might assume they're the
happiest right and they are they're
smiling reseearch is anal this by
looking at facial expressions and kind
of code the muscles and so on but turns
out they're not the happiest right who's
the happiest well let's look at the
silver Metalist are they happiest No in
fact actually if you code their facial
muscles they're showing expressions like
contempt deep sadness is the same
expression you'd make like if your
parent died or like you know a real
terrible grief moment this is the I
don't adhere to this but this is the
quote unquote second placees first loser
yeah kind of mindset because the idea is
like you know who's your major
comparison point if you're in silver you
know 2 seconds or something you would
have gotten gold and you're not feeling
objectively like you're the second best
on the planet you beat you know but all
but one of a billions of people on the
planet no you just feel terrible so
that's silver medalist what's going on
with the bronze medalist right there's
another person on this stand what's
their comparison point it's not gold
they were multiple people multiple
seconds away their Salient comparison is
like by the grace of God like I'm up
here at all I almost like you know two
seconds the other direction I would have
never gotten up here and when you
analyze the bronze medalist facial
expressions they're sometimes even
happier than the gold medalist
definitely happier than the silver who's
objectively better but sometimes even
happier than the gold medalist because
they're like oh relative to my
comparison point I'm doing amazing and
the gold medalist is expected to get
gold the next year or else it's pure
reward prediction error um especially if
they internalize the expectations of the
audience the The Spectators excuse me um
because if they come back the next year
and they're second or third on the
podium or not on the podium it's seen as
falling from a higher place exactly this
is a point that I make with my IV League
students who've been perfect in their
grades and perfect at everything to get
into a place like Yale which is like
turns out that's a terrible recipe for
happiness The Only Way Forward is stay
stay there down or create a new stay
there you don't notice right because
you're habituated to it just like the
pattern down feels really bad like
that's a terrible comparison um I often
play my students that DJ College song
All I do is win all I do is win win win
and I was like all you do is win win win
would be a Terri terrible way to
experience success in life because you
just stop noticing it over time if you
won and that's messed up because it
means when you get when you finally hit
the success that you were striving for
if you just stay at that level just
stops being good which sucks and so that
raises a different question which is
like what is a hack that we can do to
get away from that um one is to not look
for the Silver Lining but to look for
the bronze lining which is you know you
kind of think of reference points that
are lower than your I love a good
conceptual F especially when it's framed
in an experiment so thank you for that
yeah like science experiment yes so look
for the bronze linting which means find
a reference point that's not as good and
for most of the things you're comparing
whether that's your looks your Fitness
level your finances you can look and
find somebody that's doing worse than
you um another great hack for this and
this is more one that's a kind of a hack
for honic adaptation getting used to
stuff um actually comes from the ancient
Traditions I you talk a lot about you
know smart you know folks back in the
day who came up with this stuff right
this is one from the stoic tradition a
practice called negative visualization
so stoics like Marcus are really a
thought when you wake up in the morning
you should have the following thought
pattern you should think today I will
lose my success I will be exiled I'll
lose my partner I will lose my health I
won't be able to walk he doesn't say
ruminate on that for forever but just
like a little and then stop and say h
I'm not exiled I still have my success I
still have my partner and so on this is
a technique called negative
visualization um where you just imagine
you don't have to live it in real life
you just imagine you lose something um
if you've ever lost something you're
hedonically adapted to you know how
quickly you recognize the value of it
this happens to me with my phone all the
time I'm a chronic phone loser and I'm
like you know and I'm like oh my God my
phone is gone I left it in the airport
all my contacts are there and then I'm
like oh it's in the car you have this I
love my phone like it's so line in pul
fiction where he says like um what is it
it's like it's um finding at some point
I think it was Travolta says something
someone will know it where you know uh
finding finding it almost made uh losing
it worth it exactly like because you you
appreciate it in a way that you didn't
before because it was taken away from
you and that sucks to really lose your
phone sometimes in my case you really
lost the phone right but negative
visualization you don't have to do that
you just use your imagination right and
so uh if you're listening right now and
you have a kid um let's do this negative
visualization the last time you saw your
kid was the last time you ever saw them
never going to see them again no didn't
happen you don't have to room about it
but my guess is the next time you hug
your kid you'll hug just just that two
seconds of thinking about what things
would be like without it can break
through hedonic adaptation so one of my
favorite hacks for hedonic adaptation
you can use scarcity really space things
out but for the things you can't space
out you can't like have a kid and get
rid of a kid for two weeks and come back
to your kid right you can use your
imagination and it doesn't take much to
start to realize what you have and
appreciate it more so I love this one
mostly because I I think most people
including myself really U we want to
avoid thinking negative stuff especially
on purpose but what you're telling us is
that it provides a a wonderful contrast
point to kind of trampoline off into the
reality that is our current reality
Which is far better than the these
horrible scenarios and I think this gets
to you know another domain in which I
see kind of toxic positivity playing out
a lot which is kind of in this sort of
doain of like you know how do we do this
stuff better right like how do we you
know kind of get good things in life and
there's a lot of talk in some circles
about this idea of like manifesting
right I'll just think about you know I'm
feeling lonely I'll just think about
what it's like to have friends or I'm
not fit right now just imagine you know
my FIT future and fantasize about what
it's like to you know run marathons and
things like that um turns out this can
have like a this can be a case where
you're using imagination in a bad way
because what happens when you really
deeply imagine say the rewards of like
being super fit you start to get like
your brain's like firing the reward
cylinders for like what it feels like to
be super fit and there's evidence from
Gabrielle Ting's Lab at NYU that like
you actually get less motivated to do
stuff she does this in the context of
Fitness she is people who you know want
to run a 5k or want to lose some weight
for example they talk about like you
know imagine how great it would be to do
this and they're less motivated to put
on their running shoes in practice
because they've already imagined the
fantasy future turns out instead of
manifesting a better technique if you
have some habit that you want to engage
in is to imagine the obstacles the bad
stuff that's coming up right so oh I
want to get out and run this 5K what's
the obstacle to that I'm going to be in
bed alarm's going to go off what's going
to happen like oh I'm going to be you
know too warm like maybe I put my
running clothes on or oh like I'm not
going to want to it's going to be cold
out like oh I should get a nice you know
fuzzy hat to be able to do this this O's
work shows that if you actually imagine
the negative things again not ruminating
about him freaking out but imagine
particularly the obstacles for a habit
you want to engage in um you kind of
naturally come up with solutions to
those obstacles which makes it easier so
sometimes times thinking about the bad
stuff can be helpful we just have to
regulate when we do it I have a friend
who's a cardiologist from UCSF and he
says you know the danger of telling
people that you're going to write a book
or that you're going to start a podcast
or that you're going to start a company
is that if you have very supportive
friends and if you tend to be a pretty
high agency person you'll get a lot of
praise and a lot of reward and there's a
lower probability that you'll actually
do the thing because you've derived some
of the reward whereas if people tell you
you know yeah that seems kind of
unlikely given that this and that you
know it feels um doesn't feel so good
and obviously we we want to encourage
each other this is the complicated thing
it's you know it's a it's a it's a very
narrow beam to walk on you want to
encourage people but you don't want to
give them so much reward that then it
undercuts their their motivation and you
certainly don't want to discourage them
to the point where they give up on
themselves prior to even trying that's
right but you know at least in the
United States probably in other
countries too goodness do we love a
story about somebody who was told like
they couldn't do it and they did it you
know I think about the about the
enormous popularity of David goggin it
was you know had a truly difficult
childhood and internalized all these
messages of how terrible he was and um
and then used those voices other
people's and his own in his head to push
himself to do tremendously difficult
things and then to continue to do
tremendously difficult things and to
self-publish one of the most you know
popular self-published books of all time
and then to go off and become a a medic
and now he's effectively doing the
training of somebody going to medical
school for his new train like he just
refuses to stop um and it's according to
him sat in that very chair and said it's
fueled by an internal voice of you of
you can't do it and then he fights back
against that voice which is Oho
different than manifesting this image of
success exactly and and and there's
again this is a case where there's
Nuance you have to believe it's possible
Right those negative voices can't tell
you it's impossible because something
else we know about motivation is that
believing something is possible um which
requires lots of effort but it is
possible is quite helpful for you um the
best example of this comes from another
sort of sporting case uh I don't if you
know the case of Roger banister who's
the first guy to run the for minute mile
break the four break the 4 minute mile
um and before he did that people thought
it was like physiologically impossible
like the human body cannot do this and
he was like no if human body can do this
everyone was like Roger you're crazy
whatever but then he you know trained
and trained and probably to overcome his
obstacles he ran it and then within like
two months somebody else broke the
4minute mile like it had not been broken
in all of human history but as soon as
people had evidence of like oh people
can do that like now everybody does it
and now I don't know I mean I'm as you
can see not a fit person but like lots
of people run four minute miles it's not
like the huge thing high schoolers run
it yeah which is crazy I mean but the
point is that they're falling they're
probably helped out by this thing called
the banister effect like they know it's
possible right so like if you train if
you run into obstacles if you don't get
that time you're like well I guess it's
you know physiologically I just can't do
it you can kind of do it and so so there
there's this idea with the banister
effect you kind of have to be optimistic
enough to think that it's doable but
when you think that it's doable it's
really helpful to ask the question okay
what are the things that are going to
come in the way of my doing it you
imagine them really kind of vividly so
you get a sense um it can super help it
one of the things that contrasts a
country like Denmark for instance um
compared to the United States um and I
know this from discussions with my
stepmothers that you know in this
country we have this notion because we
have a lot of examples of people that
went from absolutely nothing to these uh
tremendously quote unquote high places
financially reputationally Etc
performance in whatever domain um
sometimes
overnight um you know this last year I
would say uh two events stick out in my
mind as like whoa like wow um the first
was seeing um the SpaceX um rocket get
get captured by the quote unquote
Chopsticks that was just a rocket
Landing of all things as it was so cool
everybody regardless of what else was
going on with you know people's opinions
of of uh SpaceX or Elon or whatever
we're just like whoa that was just an
awesome feat of engineering just
undeniably awesome feat of engineering
so it sets a um an up a bigger upper
ceiling on what we thought was possible
we're seeing something that we hadn't
seen before um at least not like that
not at that scale
resolution so that changes what one
conceptualize about what's possible at
in different aspects of life and um and
I think that's important it lifts the
ceiling the other was um very different
example was the overnight um the Haka
girl right who nobody knew of right made
a comment in a passing um you know video
on the street you know one of these like
whatever spontaneous interview things
and then now has a quite successful
podcast it was ranked one of the highest
um new podcast of the year um has a as
far as I understand has a a staff and a
thriving business now and like you know
took you know this is a very American
thing right to go from an unknown to one
or two quick comments to all of a sudden
um being a famous and presumably famous
and somewhat wealthy person as well and
um you know wish her nothing but luck
and in evolving that her show yeah good
good luck yeah sure like I I I love to
see people win you know like okay it it
was an unusual trajectory but but not so
unusual for the United States in some
sense because we also have the people
who you know climb the staircase or the
people that climb the staircase fell
then came back you know we we love and
we um cherish these stories um in this
country and I think it I think it frames
the the young mind in an interesting way
it sets this anything is possible often
times it takes clearly a ton of hard
work often times at the expense of other
aspects of one's mental or
or life you know um Life Enrichment
Family Etc but it's a very American
thing for people to be like anything's
possible yeah what do you think that
does to our level of Happiness if we're
somebody that you know is looking for
happiness wants a good life wants
resources but doesn't
um like she maybe they feel a little
guilty that they're not as quote unquote
ambitious as everybody else but then you
contrast that with a country like
Denmark where people are very happy
they're certainly Ambi ambitious Danes
but they're actually I was told that the
word ambition has is a little little bit
of a pejorative little bit because
you're not supposed to you know it's a
very um you're not supposed to get that
far ahead of anybody without
acknowledging that you're still part of
the pack um forgive me Danes but um
they're nice people so they'll likely go
easy on me and I have Danish relatives
so like how do we how do we take what's
out and around us address who we are and
reconcile those things so that we're
we're good with what we've got and know
that we are good with what we've got
yeah yeah I mean I think this is a spot
where you know culture plays a big role
I think you're exactly right about
Denmark in fact the Dan have this idea
of Jon's law I'm probably pronouncing
this poorly but JN te's law which is
idea is like you're aren't really
supposed to be better than anybody else
or like kind of showing off or like
pushing yourself or thinking you're
better even kind of maybe striving
specific not to be you can strive to be
better but to strive to be better than
other people it's kind of it's like a no
no it's sort of culturally frowned upon
um in this way that I think is
completely the opposite in the US right
now where like that's seen as an awesome
thing um I think the problem is that
these kind of rags to Rich's stories um
you know you you've given cases of like
ones that there's like a moment right in
SpaceX they do this wonderful thing
you're like yeah they kind of got there
and you know Haku is still doing her
thing but there was this moment of like
oh my gosh she kind of achieved this
success there's this idea that we kind
of think that there's a end destination
for something um you know I'm going to
you know get $50 million I'm going to
get married or I'm going to get that
promotion at work right my for my
students I'm going to get into like a
really Elite college or something like
that um we don't put our emphasis on the
Journey part we put our emphasis on the
destination part and we assume that the
destination is going to come with a lot
of Happiness um this is a bias that
researchers have called the arrival
fallacy I'll be happy when you know it's
almost like the happily ever after I'll
be happily ever after if I get that
promotion or happily ever after when I
meet that person and what we know from
hedonic adaptation is that thing that's
awesome in the moment when you arrive
there quickly becomes the other thing um
you mentioned briefly the gold medalists
who have this moment where it's like
they won the gold medal and that's
awesome but now everything else is
downhill or I just got to do it again
right we we arrive at the best possible
place we could have fantasized and
instantly it's like I just have to start
chasing the next carrot so sometimes
when we find ourselves I think as
Americans you know chasing after the
thing I think it's important to remember
that first of all that chase is going to
involve lots of ups and downs it's not
going to be a lineary path it's not
going to be overnight even the ones you
mentioned maybe except with the
exception of UA girl really extreme case
um required some kind of work and ups
and downs and these kinds of things
right um we don't see those but more the
happiness that we're going to get it's
better off if we're going not for the
end result that arrival and falling pray
at arrival fallacy it's better if we can
see some happiness um in the journey um
this is often been called this idea of
sort of finding a journey mindset which
is sort of what can you take from the
process of getting there right so you
you want to run your 5K but like what
can you do to try to enjoy the process
of you know those runs that go along the
way and noticing the kind of ups and
downs and sort of paying attention to
the journey it's one way to kind of
break out of falling prey to this
arrival fallacy requires a serious frame
shift totally and I think one that you
know is not culturally accepted in the
US um and I think this causes a lot of
you know it causes a happiness hit not
just because like sometimes we don't get
there sometimes there's reason you know
you set your Heights super high you know
you want to be Roger banister or
whatever like not all of us are going to
get there whether it's a four-minute
mile or success at work or $50 million
or whatever it is so sometimes if you
set your sights too high you just don't
get there and so that's a happiness hit
um but a bigger Happ and sometimes when
you do get there it's a happiness hit
because you get there and there's the
happiness for a moment but then you know
that that hit doesn't keep coming um I
think we also just lose out on something
when we're not in that Journey mindset
because there's a lot of cool stuff
along the way if we can kind of pay
attention but yeah I think it's a big
cult shift from the way Americans
usually think but if it's one that if we
can achieve that we'll start feeling a
lot better and it means even the
failures in life are kind of good
because you were enjoying yourself along
the way from my podcast I did an episode
about these sort of Olympic medals where
I talked about um that that you know the
bronze lining effect and things um and I
had Michelle Quan um who you know
Olympic medalist we all remember her but
mostly just one silver and I talked to
her about you know what that felt like
and she said didn't matter to me the
things I loved about being Olympics
wasn't the metal stand it was when she
first she talked about putting her
skates on and seeing the Rings in the
ice and recognizing as soon as I tie
these laces I'm going to get to skate
over those and I fantasize that's the
journey mindset right you're not looking
at the thing at the end you're paying
enough attention to the stuff along the
way even some of the stuff that's a pain
in the butt that you kind of get some
Joy um on the
ride I certainly have learned to Relish
in the failures as well as the successes
and um you know I think some of that
also just comes with age I've always
wanted to say
that it's true though it kind of comes
you're old enough now Andrew you can you
can jump into it yeah you crew enough
experiences good and bad and neutral and
you kind of go like the other day I was
I'm like in this kind of weird state of
mind I was like wait I've been here
before MH like this shifts like no
worries like this shifts and then sure
enough it shifted you know like I think
the first time we find ours in a place
or we find oursel back in a place and we
forget we've been there before um for
whatever reason or we try and pretend we
haven't been there before it's like and
then you you go through enough of those
Cycles like okay this is part of a
larger trajectory this an amazing thing
about the brain I never understood I
still don't which is that when we're
feeling happy we don't tend to think
gosh this feeling is going to go away
sometimes a little bit of that but when
we're feeling lousy it does seem to do
something to our sense of time our time
perception that makes it seem especially
in the real lows in the real trenches
that it's going to go on forever we
can't imagine feeling differently this
two shall pass is very hard to
internalize when we're in those States
totally but it can make you feel a lot
if you can get that distance from your
current state this is kind of you know
you had Ethan cross on the show that he
talks a lot a lot if you can kind of get
that distance of well how's this going
to feel in five years how's this going
to feel in 10 years you can sometimes
feel a lot better interestingly even
when the happy stuff if we can get some
sense that like this isn't going to last
forever that can sometimes boost the
happiness cuz we're kind of almost doing
like a negative visualization in the
forward direction right um so a scarce
experience if you're having it it's
useful to remember like you know this is
limited right this is temporary I should
enjoy this now while it's happening um
the most extreme version of this of
course is with our own lives right
contemplating our mortality um there's
this idea of uh momento Mori which is a
common phrase actually of my my ring has
momento Mori on it um which is morbid
right I'm going to die I'm not going to
be here but when you recognize that you
know the old school folks thought and I
think it's true like you realize like I
can't take any of this stuff for granted
I have to pay attention now this is not
you know the kind of thing that's going
to last forever and so I think moments
like that for positive experiences can
feel like that you know if you're
tasting a delicious glass of Pino Noir
sitting yesterday I was you know while
I'm here I you know took a walk on Santa
Monica beach and was like you know my
brain was like oh I have to interview
Andrew coming out I was like no no I'm
going to like fly back to cold you know
East Coast tomorrow I need to pay
attention right so thinking that this is
finite can actually help you there's a
very funny study on this with um college
students where they did this sort of
funny framing technique where they
brought senior college students into lab
um you know kind of halfway through you
know the spring semester and told them
you know you either have this many hours
less of your time which Mak is a big
number you know it makes it seem like
thousands of hours or you have only this
many days left before you graduate just
like just a reminder what they found was
the one that get the days manipulation
where it felt kind of short they wound
up doing doing more things like kind of
getting in those things that they
thought oh I'll get around to it
eventually um and wound up kind of
feeling happier so recognizing that
things are short sometimes uh has a
benefit um maybe both for negative
emotions like this this two shall pass
but also the positive stuff like this
two shall pass so I got to enjoy it
while it's while it's around it's so
interesting because it's kind of
counterintuitive that realizing that
something positive is also fleeting
allows us to savor it more because from
a informed perspective one could imagine
okay so you're you're at a great meal
with people you love and it's been let's
let's even say it's been a a rough month
before and you're like really in it and
someone says well you know like this too
is going to pass you're like that sounds
like kind of a downer right but then if
it allows you to savor it more yeah
that's key so yeah there does seem to be
this inverse relationship between sad
States and happy states where when we
are in sad States we feel like it will
go on forever and we'll do almost
anything to get out of unless they've
completely collapsed
us in our happy States we don't want to
be reminded that it will pass and this
is why I think in part not the only
reason why people will take um mood
altering drugs I'm talking about this in
the recreational sense like to to sort
of forget everything else and forget
that whatever they're experiencing is
going to wear off yeah yeah and I think
you know it it's not nice to think that
these good states are going to pass I
think it is helpful because it forces us
to pay attention Jud to them I'm having
this a little bit now where you know
we're coming up on the holidays the time
you and I are having this conversation
and um you know I'm getting ready to do
the holidays with the in-laws who you
know which there's lots of positive but
some like oh God I don't want to but
because my my in-laws my my mom is
getting up there I'm kind of like oh
recognizing that there's not infinite
holidays left with these people that I
care about that it's kind of more finite
and maybe more finite than it's been um
it's causing me to be more excited about
it than I would have been and so and
that's morbid thought right momento Mor
is meant to be a really Bittersweet
emotion right that we we are finite
right but it can kind of give you this
appreciation it can cause you to savor
in a special way so sometimes the morbid
is good a little bit a little bit morbid
it's the contrast again yeah yeah it's
the contrast maybe it's why people watch
horror movies I'm not into horror movies
but so that you know maybe you feel
safer I don't know that stuff always
made me feel terrified if I was you know
watch some of that late at night High
amigdala reaction me too me too I hate
horror movies but it's worth noting that
like you know a lot of people like them
you know huge industry um and even if
you don't like horror movies you might
like you know maybe a spicy food that
feels kind not not even good it feels
awful in the moment or super hot bath or
you know cold like really cold plunge
right I like getting out of the cold
plunge for exactly the reason we're
talking about yeah or even you know
honestly for me like I'm not a super fan
of exercise but like a really really
hard workout that feels miserable when
you finally stop it feels I do a lot of
yoga and my favorite thing is at the end
when they're like and now you can do
shasa Shas is always good if you've
worked the worst you're just really like
ha you know we it's helpful to kind of
have these moments to like have this
contrast and so building the contrast in
where you kind of give yourself some
negative emotion you know whether it's a
kind of imagin negative emotion like
negative visualization or a fictional
one a lot of our favorite fictional
experiences are pretty terrible like a
novel is really boring if the
protagonist like has nothing bad happen
just going to coast along and things are
just mildly positive no we want them to
go through some terrible stuff even when
we really
associate with them and sort of see them
as ourselves and so yeah these like
fictional worlds where we can play with
negative emotions a little bit um are
super interesting psychologically
because like why would we do that but
you know as you're saying even when you
get you know these like neural
stimulation we kind of want some of the
negative stuff so um there there's a an
interesting paper about what's the right
ratio of positive to negative emotions
um and it's not 100% positive for
hedonic adaptation and so on but I think
really the recipe for a rich life is is
varied for these contrast reasons we've
been talking about so what's the ideal
ratio they don't know yeah they didn't
fig they it was like like boom it's like
exactly 6040 positive negative yeah here
obviously anticipating a number uh and I
think it's also worth remembering that
um you know we're talking as though
they're negative emotions and positive
emotions you know a lot of the most
interesting emotions are more complex
than that you talked about this you know
SpaceX kind of Chopsticks moment my
guess is the emotion you're experiencing
there is one that researchers like daker
Kelner and colleagues would call a right
this sense of oh my gosh that is amazing
there's something bigger than me that
like is able to do this thing and one of
the reasons a is such an interesting
emotion is it's usually destabilizing
right they're like things that are
better than I ever expected you know
humankind is so masterful space is so
big nature is so vast right it kind of
feels a little destabilizing when you
experience a but we also see it as
positive and so I think kind of if
you're feeling a little B in your
emotional life trying to find moments
where you can get these emotions that
are not so obviously positive or
negative but are a little bit of both
can be um really inspiring it's one of
the reasons you know you talk a lot
about sort of psychedelics and these
sort of altered experiences um those
experiences tend to be thought of as
being really consistent with moments of
awe but they again are not universally
positive but they kind of expand you and
take you a little further I can attest
that they're not universally
positive sometimes they're terrifying um
even in their clinical
application the thing I appreciated
about the rocket Landing was that indeed
I I feel awe looking up at the stars at
night or just thinking about how we're
having this conversation in a room and
well and then expanding out to like
we're a little little object floating in
the universe and that can be a bit
overwhelming what's I think incredible
is that through the harnessing of
engineering and physics SpaceX was able
to create something that was so U well
controlled at a scale that we I'm
normally accustomed to thinking about
things sure I've seen planes and we
landed on the moon Etc some people will
debate that but we were on the moon I
wasn't but somebody was to
see control and harnessing of physics
and Engineering at a scale that is
certainly not at the scale of the entire
galaxies but it's starting to approach
outer space and Back Again clearly and
in such a um I think it was the slowing
of of that enormously large object yeah
um and the capture that that felt so
gratifying I also think and this um can
explain a fair amount of human
technological evolution is that the
human brain either Delights in or at
least um Marvels in creating action at a
distance I mean think about what went
into creating that amount of action in
an in an object with that much mass at a
distance right and um and then you can
layer through all the things where we're
looking at on our phones on our screens
I mean all that technology is relatively
recent and to think that us human beings
as opposed to CAC monkeys could do that
like we are the primate species that is
so far ahead in terms of technological
development compared to every other
species on the planet yeah the only
other species of of life that might be
besting us and we don't know is I I've
heard this Theory it's it's rather
entertaining which is that all these
trillions of microorganisms that live in
our gut microbiome what if we're just
vehicles for them to get around and pass
to one another um and they're just they
have a a sort of a uh Consciousness that
is is all about just propagating and
that we think that we're doing all this
stuff for some Evolution but it's just
to keep the microbiota going I don't
really believe that finally we could get
to space where we could really evolve
the microbiota and they just want more
microbiota so you know that that we're
being hijacked I don't I I chuckle at
that theory I don't actually think
that's there there we talked about too
few studies of dog and primate cognition
way too few studies of microbiotic
cognition
unfortunately
uh this is probably the right time to
say that we are a storytelling species
this is what we're doing right now we're
creating story around these things that
we can't quite explain and during the
course of today's conversation I I
realized that this thing that we call
happiness um has at least three levels
or layers that we filter it through when
we ask ourselves are we happy how do I
be happier um this element of contrast
with negative experiences seems to be a
repeating theme momentto Mori being a
negative sort of dark cloud from which
we're supposed to see the light and and
act in the light this exists in
religious narratives philosophical
narratives um and scientific
reality I could imagine three layers the
first is sensory experience the reason
to take a cold shower folks in addition
to the fact they'll save you on your
heating B bill is that the warm shower
that follows in fact that's how I do it
feels so good 10 times better than it
would if you had just gotten into the
warm shower I promise same thing about
getting out of the cold plunge you know
there's a lot of debate about these
things but this is just pure sensory
experience and contrast of the sort that
we're talking about today hunger and
then eating a delicious piece of food or
eating a not so delicious piece of food
but you're hungry and so it's that much
more delicious okay million examples we
could spiral her so there's sensory
experience there's raw sensory
perception and experience from which the
contrast creates this thing that we like
feel better MH AKA happiness sort of
then there's story like God last year
was a tough year this year was better
there's also and I've seen this before
like we were killing it for two years
and then this year was kind of a me year
this is not the case by the way but I'm
very fortunate that podcast has continue
to grow and expand but for some people
they they're not as happy with their
whatever salary this year because even
though it's spectacular by somebody
else's standards by their standard it's
down from previous years so there's the
story that we create that has it's not
sensory experience it's perception based
on dope of mean and its perception based
on reward and Punishment Etc and then
there's this third layer which is
meaning MH like you said yeah you know
spending time with in-laws like okay
every moment of it might not be as
awesome as you might like but there's
meaning in spending time with people
that are extended family especially when
elders and very and younger are in the
same room there's something really it's
it's a it it layers on story to create
this sort of um uh other level that we
call meaning and so what I'm realizing
in is that these are three time scales
yeah so we have the immediate time scale
of Happiness we have the kind of
intermediate one where we introduce a
story and then we have meaning which is
kind of like this whole picture yeah so
it seems to me that we need to approach
happiness from all three levels that
it's not enough to just be like a dog
yeah which are in the sensory experience
presumably of of Happiness if they tell
stories they don't tell them to us and
if they have meaning I don't know but
they they seem to like nailed the first
level yeah so and they're probably they
probably don't have the capacity to do
the other two so it's not like they're
not doing it and kind of missing out
they kind of have brains that don't let
them notice they're missing out but we
unfortunately have brains that would
feel like we were really missing out if
we just had the sensory experiences you
know without the good stories I think
you're sort of pointing to this idea
that sort of being happy in your life
and being happy with your life the withy
life part has the kind of medium time
scale stories but also they're really
big ones right you know is my life am I
doing anything really meaning with my
life am I finding purpose and so on um
the funny thing though is to get to that
big time scale to find a sense of
purpose and stuff like that sometimes it
pays to do stuff at the local level at
the medium and shorter term time scale
um and one of the things researchers
have found is that if you're engaging in
activities at the short-term time scales
that kind of fit with your values or
what these positive psychologists have
often called your strengths um that can
be a way to sort of achieve purpose so
so what are strengths so researchers do
this thing where they want to look at
like all the valuable things people can
do out in the world right so what are
the things that you value um and folks
like Chris Peterson and colleagues have
come up with this list of what they call
different character strengths and there
are things that like you know you can
actually if you Google online character
strengths you'll get the big list often
people talk about they're being 24 but
they're just universally good things
like being brave be you know citizenship
humor like you know social intelligence
love of learning right you know kind of
empathy fairness right these kind of
sets of values that we have people
differ and how much they value one or
the other you know so I could ask you
Andrew like what's better like bravery
or humor probably both pretty high for
you I would imagine but like about
Prudence versus love of learning I have
a guess yeah I mean if I had to pick
between bravery and humor I I think
bravery is probably more important to me
I'm more humor yeah I mean I love humor
but if I had to pick it's sort of like
you know steak and coffee I'm going
steak Yeah the point is we there are
individual differences in this um and
there are formal tests you can do online
if you Google the IIA character
strengths test you'll see these 24 and
you can do one of these very systematic
you know kind of tests to do it but
really just kind to think about like
what are the values that you value um
and the ones that come to mind as being
particularly about you the ones that you
resonate with are what somebody like
Chris Peterson would call your signature
strengths they're the ones that when you
execute them you kind of feel like
things are meaningful and purposeful and
so on and so the idea is that a one
recipe for a person a purposeful life at
the local level um is trying to engage
in behaviors that allow you to use more
of these values or strengths um and one
of my favorite pieces of research that
looks at both the power of this and how
even though if it seems like that those
are hard things to bring in like you
should bring them in more um is some
work by this woman Amy rinsky who's a
professor at the University of
Pennsylvania and she does these studies
on what she calls job crafting um which
is a practice where you take your normal
job description is whatever your job is
and figure out ways that you can Infuse
your signature strengths into to them
you know so you as a podcaster if your
signature sank with bravery you could
bring in guests that made me feel a
little bit intimidating to you probably
like me I imagine but but or like you
could take on topics that are a little
bit harder right that kind of push you a
little bit right if your signature
strength was humor you'd add more
company or make more jokes if it was
love of learning you'd pick topics that
like you didn't know anything about but
you kind of dive in right you take
whatever your normal job description is
and you find a way to build in your
strengths and the reason I love Amy's
work so much is that she studies
signature strengths not in academics
like us who have very flexible jobs or
podcasters she studies signature
strengths in hospital janitorial staff
workers um who are you know these are
people who are cleaning the linen in a
hospital room or mopping the floors and
stuff not a job where you think there's
lots of flexibility or you could build
in things like you know humor and love
of learning and this stuff but she finds
interestingly that like around a quarter
to a third of these janitorial staff
workers say that their job is a calling
they love it they get a lot of purpose
from it and and they're the ones that
are naturally building in their
signature strengths and she tells in her
story in her work she tells these lovely
stories there a story of a janitorial
staff worker who worked uh in a
chemotherapy Ward and if you've been
unlucky enough to have cancer and had to
have chemotherapy or know someone who
did you know that people tend to get
really sick because the medicine makes
people really nauseous so a big part of
this guy's job was like cleaning up
vomit basically but he said you know my
job isn't to clean my vomit my strengths
are like humor and social intelligence
and what I do is I make a joke this is
somebody a really crappy day and I'm
going to do something that's going to
make them laugh and if I do that then I
W it's not my paycheck and I guess he
had a standard joke which is like oh my
god look like a big pile of vit over
time like for me and like you know
you're laughing listeners probably
laughing he's like that's my job um he
talked to another worker who worked in a
coma Ward so this um individual couldn't
talk to the patients because they're in
comas but her strength was creativity
and so every day she like moved the
artwork and the plants around you know
just kind of created some changes and
she thought maybe that would pop people
out of their com I don't know if that's
medically plausible probably not but it
doesn't matter to her she felt like she
was executing her creativity and so the
moral of this job crafting work is no
matter what your job is there's probably
some room to build in some more purpose
if you take some time to think about
like what are the strengths what are the
things that get you going if you need a
tip you can kind of Google these things
but then how could I Infuse that into my
normal job description and there's
probably a lot more flexibility than you
think you don't need to quit your job
and become a podcaster to like get this
flexibility probably whatever you do
there's some window where you can build
that in that's awesome those are awesome
stories um I also was just thinking
about the chander cleaning up the vomit
like to like like restore some dignity
to these people that ex clearly know
they're making a mess and like you know
humor being the ultimate bridge and um
and uh darn it why' you make me have to
choose between humor and the other thing
but CU
humor thinking my answer it's very brave
to clean up V well I think right yeah
and to and to bring humor to a place
where you know some people might presume
humor is not allowed but goodness um the
signature strengths and the and the list
of you said 24 of them where can people
learn more about these signature
strengths I think this would be a really
powerful exercise and uh we can always
find the link and put it in the show
note captions but is there like a place
that people can find this stuff the
values and action is viia character
strengths. org um so I can share the
link and you can stick it in your show
notes but yeah people can go on there
for free and do one of these kind of you
know formal psychometric tests where you
measure your strengths see what they are
and it's a fun website too because you
get to kind of they give you some
suggestions because some of these you
know values are like Prudence is one of
them like how do I exercise prudence and
they'll have you know these are
different things um they also make the
suggestion and this is a a homework
assignment I give in my happiness class
of suggesting you do this with a good
friend or a romantic partner have each
of you do this and find strengths that
you share together um and then you can
go on what what researchers call a
strength state where you know if you
both have bravery then that means you
guys should do the I don't know the
obstacle course or do some really scary
hike if you both have humor now you go
to a comedy show if you both love
learning now you go to a museum or
something so you find the thing that's
like your convergent strengths and you
do something that exercises them so that
means you can use your strengths to get
purpose not just in your work but in
your leisure too and I think this is
another spot where we get stuff wrong I
think a lot of us have work that tends
to use our strengths we tend to
gravitate towards careers many of us
where we can use our strengths a lot of
folks aren't that lucky but in our
leisure time we don't often do that so
much right often our leisure time is
like plop down you know watch Netflix
for a lot of folks like if you think
about how you can build your strengths
into your leisure time it gets even more
exciting so you know you're talking
about working with your hands and doing
all this stuff like you know build the
bravery and the humor into that somehow
and now you get your leisure time doing
double duty for giving you a sense of
purpose and meaning too I love doing
stuff with my hands and I also love
doing things that are useful to other
people and years ago I used to go set up
fish tanks for people at their homes and
I I don't know why when I just kept
setting up all these fish tanks for all
these people I delighted in it and um it
makes me realize that I think for
everybody certainly not just me that we
get tremendous pleasure from being
useful to others in ways that really
resonate with kind of who who we feel we
are and these strengths I think that's
kind of the ultimate situation really
and if we're getting paid for it also
great but you're saying work it into um
your recreational time as as well yeah
and I'm glad you brought up this idea of
doing for others because we haven't
talked about that but this is another
behavioral hack that's huge for
happiness and I think one that we get
wrong as a culture in the US but kind of
broadly there's all this talk about
self-care or treat yourself if you look
at any kind of article about happiness
maybe not so evidence-based talking
about self self self self if you look at
happy people though happy people don't
spend a lot of time on the themselves
they tend to be very other oriented so
controlled for income happier people
donate more money to charity than not so
happy people um for the amount of free
time people have happy people tend to
volunteer for others broadly construed
whether it's you know helping formally
or kind of donating time like they tend
to help more than not so happy people um
that again correlation it could be happy
doing nice stuff for others helps you
become happy it could be that if you're
happy you do nice stuff for others and
for sure that link is true there is this
thing called the feel good do good
effect um but lots of experiments have
sort of forced people to do nice stuff
for others and found that it winds up
making them happier one study uh by Lara
aknan and colleagues did this study
where they walk up to people on the
street and hand them 20 bucks it's
awesome study to be if you're some
undergrad walking around on campus like
oh cool 20 bucks but then you'll be told
how to spend it you either have to spend
the 20 bucks to treat yourself do
something nice for yourself or spend the
20 bucks on someone else do something
nice for other people and people at the
end of the day and even kind of a later
time scales report being happier when
they spend the exact same amount of
money on someone else versus themselves
and I think this has a big message
because sometimes I don't know if you're
in I don't know if you like you but if
you're having a bad day it's like I'm
going to treat myself for something I
might buy something or spend some money
on myself by myself a kind of cool
experience but if you gifted that
experience to your brother or your good
friend your cooworker your spouse it
might actually make you happier than
having that experience yourself which is
really counterintuitive but it's what
the data show I've discovered this in
recent years I love love love giving
gifts it just um it's the best feeling
it's the best feeling here's here's
another hack you can do to help to kind
of help others oddly is to ask for help
which is something thing we forget is
quite powerful um think about the last
time somebody asked you for advice
advice that you could give probably felt
pretty good it probably made you feel a
little competent or whatever um probably
liked helping that person you get the
happiness Boost from helping that person
we forget that asking other people for
help especially when we know they can
kind of do it um can be a way to sort of
give them a little B gift and make them
happy um this is one that can be hard
for me because I like to you know think
about my competence all the time and I
don't want to be a burden on people I
don't vulnerable yes self um but it
turns out especially if you're a
particularly self-sufficient person when
you ask people for help it can be really
useful so um so that's another one you
know because I know some folks listening
right now might not have the financial
means to be donating money or the you
know time affluence and wherewithal to
be doing gifts and these things but
remember that asking for help can be a
gift to someone else and it's a little
social connection too that's
awesome I will also say your suggestion
that people um fill out the signature
strengths site and then use that as a
first date incentive I look forward to
the day when a comment comes through on
YouTube that uh people were married as a
consequence of a first date TI's going
out of business if we start doing these
strength dates like that so yeah every
once in a while someone will um contact
me and say that they um watched the
fertility episode and uh did a male and
female fertility episode and um that
they now have uh a child on the way um I
don't ask questions about when the child
was conceived like what the relationship
to the fertility episode was was I'm
assuming it was the information in the
fertility episode but the um but I
always I'm like wow that's wild so I I
bet you that at some point in the future
I'm creating a little bit of a time
capsule here um you'll get contacted or
something will um legitimately fall into
the comments about people deciding to
spend their life together as a
consequence of having done the signature
strength first date you heard it here
first from Dr lri
Santos and in all seriousness um Lori Dr
Santos I just want to say thank you so
much for doing the work you do it's
awesome awesome work I mean what's more
important than our emotional state and
to strive to be happy but to understand
happiness so that we're not pursuing
something that either doesn't exist or
that
um is an illusion that's been created
for us like really I think one of the
amazing things about what you do is you
realistically frame happiness as
attainable but you frame it in the
science of how to actually get it it um
and what it means and as people could
probably detect I love love love that
you've studied this thing that we call
happiness and other aspects of of
emotion and social cognition in the
context of not just humans but our
non-human friends cats and dogs and use
that knowledge like building up from
basic understanding of how neural
circuits and psychology work to a place
that humans can really act on and you've
given us a tremendous number of
actionable tools today I mean too need
to list off here all at once we'll put
them in the time stamps as as tools so
that people can get right to them and
review them but the social connection
piece obviously the understanding of the
contrast with difficult things to arrive
at better States um and different time
scales and doing for others and and just
so much there's too much here for me to
to list off without adding another 30
minutes to this uh podcast and no one
wants to hear me um speak anymore um so
I'm just going to say thank you for the
research that you have done and
continued to do thank you for doing your
podcast I'm going to start listening to
your podcast I love these issues and I
think they're super super uh timely and
important uh for everybody and thanks
for taking time out of your schedule to
come here and educate us today thanks so
much it was a blast let's do it again
definitely thank you for joining me for
today's discussion with Dr Lori Santos
to learn more about her laboratory's
work her teachings and to find a link to
her excellent podcast please see the
show note captions if you're learning
from Andor enjoying this podcast please
subscribe to our YouTube channel that's
a terrific zeroc cost way to support us
please also click follow for the podcast
on both Spotify and apple and on both
Spotify and apple you can leave us up to
a five-star review please also check out
the sponsors mentioned at the beginning
and throughout today's episode that's
the best way to support this podcast if
you have questions for me or comments
about the podcast or topics or guests
that you'd like me to consider for the
hubman Lab podcast please put those in
the comment section on YouTube I do read
all the comments and if you're not
already following me on social media I
am huberman on all social media
platforms so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter Facebook threads and
Linkedin and on all those platforms I
discuss science and science related
tools some of which overlaps with the
content of the hubman Lab podcast but
much of which is distinct from the
content on the huberman Lab podcast
again that's hubman lab on all social
media platforms for those of you that
haven't heard I have a new book coming
out it's my very first book it's
entitled protocols an operating manual
for the human body this is a book that
I've been working on for more than 5
years years and that's based on more
than 30 years of research and experience
and it covers protocols for everything
from sleep to exercise to Stress Control
protocols related to focus and
motivation and of course I provide the
scientific substantiation for the
protocols that are included the book is
now available by pre-sale at protocols
book.com there you can find links to
various vendors you can pick the one
that you like best again the book is
called protocols an operating manual for
the human body and if you haven't
already subscribed to our neural network
newsletter the neural network newsletter
is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that
includes everything from podcast
summaries to what we call protocols in
the form of brief 1 to three page PDFs
that cover things like how to optimize
your sleep how to regulate your dopamine
we also have protocols related to
deliberate cold exposure get a lot of
questions about that deliberate heat
exposure and on and on again all
available at completely zero cost you
simply go to huberman lab.com go to the
menu tab in the top right corner scroll
down to newsletter and enter your email
and I should mention that we do not
share your email with anybody thank you
once again for joining me for today's
discussion with Dr Lori Santos and last
but certainly not least thank you for
your interest in science
[Music]