welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Bill Eddie
Bill Eddie is a practicing lawyer a
professional mediator a licensed
therapist and on the faculty of the
School of Law at Pepperdine University
he is a world expert in conflict
resolution in particular how to resolve
conflicts with what are called high
conflict personalities I should be very
clear that these high conflict
personalities as you'll learn today are
not in a category of so-called
personality disorders now it is the case
that people with high conflict
personalities often also have borderline
personality disorder narcissistic
personality disorder or suffer from
bipolar depression however as you'll
soon learn people who have this high
conflict personality type could fall
into any one of those three different
categories any combination of them or
none of them at all these high conflict
personalities essentially come in two
flavors some are very outwardly
combative they like to argue they like
to generate conflict in a way that's
very overt very obvious the others which
comprise about 50% of high confli
personality types are very passive they
play the victim or they leverage other
people so-called negative advocates in
order to achieve their goal of creating
a lot of conflict where they always
appear as the victim during today's
discussion you'll learn how to identify
these high conflict personality types
based on some very simple questions that
you can ask yourself about them he also
explains how to deal with these people
in the workplace setting in
relationships and importantly of course
how to disengage from these people not
just in the short term but permanently
now across today's discussion you'll
realize that bill Eddie is very
sensitive both to the suffering that
high conflict personalities cause for
other people and therefore how to
identify them avoid them in engage from
them but he also makes it a point not to
demonize these high conflict personality
types instead as a mediator as a lawyer
and as a therapist he is really most
interested in helping people resolve
their conflicts with these people and
find the best most peaceful path forward
for conflict resolution Dr Bill Eddie is
the author of several important books
related to this topic and related topics
such as five types of people that can
ruin your life it's an excellent book
I've read it and I highly recommend it
for everyone one he's also written books
about adult bullies which are becoming
increasingly common online and in real
life and about mediating conflict
resolution and separations and things
like divorce and in Family Court
situations where he spent a lot of his
professional career as a lawyer by the
end of today's episode you will have a
lot of New Practical tools for being
able to identify these high conflict
personality types and learning how to
navigate forward and frankly away from
them in the best way possible before we
begin I'd like to emphasize that this
podcast is separate from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford it is however
part of my desire and effort to bring
zero cost to Consumer information about
science and science related tools to the
general public in keeping with that
theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of
today's podcast our first sponsor is
Maui neui venison Maui Nei venison is
100% wild harvested venison from the
island of Maui and it is the most
nutrient dense and delicious red meat
available I've spoken before on this
podcast about the fact that most of us
should be consuming
about one gram of quality protein per
pound of body weight every day that
protein provides critical building
blocks for things like muscle repair and
synthesis but it also promotes overall
health given the importance of muscle
tissue as an organ eating enough quality
protein each day is also a terrific way
to Stave off hunger one of the key
things however is to make sure that
you're getting enough quality protein
without ingesting excess calories Maui
NY venison has an extremely high quality
protein per calorie ratio so that
getting 1 gram of quality protein per
pound of body weight is both easy and
doesn't cause you to ingest an excess of
calories also mauii venison is
absolutely delicious they have venison
steaks ground venison and venison bone
broth I personally like all of those in
fact I probably eat a Maui Nei venin
Burger pretty much every day and
occasionally I'll swap that for a Maui
Nei steak and if you're traveling a lot
or you're simply on the go they have
Maui Nei venison sticks which have 10
gram of protein per stick at just 55
calories and they're extremely
convenient you can can pretty much take
them anywhere if you'd like to try Maui
Nei venison you can go to mauii venison
docomo to get 20% off your membership or
first order again that's Maui venison
docomo today's episode is also brought
To Us by expressvpn expressvpn is a
virtual private Network that keeps your
data secure and private it does that by
routing your internet activity through
their servers and encrypting it so that
no one can see or sell your data now I'm
familiar with the effects of not
securing my data well enough several
years ago I had one of my bank accounts
hacked and it was a terrible amount of
work to have that reversed and for the
account to be secured when that happened
I talked to my friends in the tech
community and what they told me was that
even though you think your internet
connection may be secure oft times it's
not especially if you're using Wi-Fi
networks such as those on planes in
hotels at coffee shops and other public
places surprisingly even at home your
data might not be as secure as you think
to make sure that what I described
before would never happen to me again I
started using expressvpn the great thing
about expressvpn is that I don't even
notice that it's running since the
connection it provides is so fast I have
it on my computer and on my phone and I
keep it on whenever I'm connected to the
internet with expressvpn I know
everything is secure my web browsing all
my passwords all my data and of course
anything that's behind an account wall
like a bank account it can't be tracked
and no one can access or steal your data
which is terrific if you'd like to start
protecting your internet activity using
expressvpn you can go to expressvpn /
huberman and you can get an extra 3
months free again that's
expressvpn.com
huberman to get an extra 3 months free
and now for my discussion with Bill
Eddie Bill Eddie welcome thanks so much
for having me I'm excited to discuss
this with you I've read your books I
learned about them from perhaps one of
the smartest people I know she said you
should check out this book called five
types of people that can ruin your life
I said well that's an impressive title
and I tore through the book um learned a
ton you have a number of other books I
mentioned them in my introduction
and I suppose it's appropriate to say
that you are an expert in conflict
conflict resolution and in particular
how to deal with people that are high
conflict so maybe you could just tell us
what a high-c conflict person is how
common are these people and how does
this overlap with some of the more
traditional quote unquote diagnosis of
personality disorders yeah it's
fascinating because I started out as a
clinical social worker working with
children and families and psychiatric
hospitals outpatient clinics but I
really like conflict resolution so I
went to law school to get a law degree
so I could do mediation other conflict
resol olution and I practiced family law
and when I started in Family Court I
noticed right away that a lot of the
conflicts seem to be driven by people's
personalities rather than the legal
issue because I was also doing mediation
in my office I go to court in the
morning do mediation in the afternoon
same exact issues in the morning people
were stuck for two or three years in the
afternoon two or three mediation
sessions shook hands went separate ways
so in Family Court a lot of people
aren't familiar with this but since the
1980s there's been the use of the term
high conflict
families and Family Court Lawyers judges
mediators therapists identified high
conflict families as repeatedly coming
to court to make decisions as having a
lot of hostility
of just seeming driven in One Direction
unable to be flexible and in many ways
unable to truly have empathy for their
kids so they'd fight over their kids and
so high conflict families was a term
when I became a lawyer in
1993 I was like wait a minute these
aren't high conflict families these have
maybe one maybe two people with high
conflict personalities or traits of
personality disorder which I knew about
since
1980 and working in hospitals and
outpatient clinics because you're also a
clinical psychologist clinical social
worker clinical social worker so I got a
master's in social work in 1981 then I
became I got licensed to do therapy on
my own so I'm a licensed clinical social
worker in California I can diagnose
disorders I can do treatment without
supervision I went through that and
that's how I became licensed so when I
came into Family Court I go this is the
same patterns when I was working say
with people in the psychiatric hospital
who had addictions depression all these
problems and my job as the hospital
social worker was to help them with
their outside problem their family
problem so I did family counseling for
the
patients um with their job maybe their
employer wanted to fire them because of
their behavior and I tried to help keep
their job um um maybe they were getting
evicted their landlord couldn't stand
their behavior and I'd solve one problem
and I go I'm I've got you into marriage
counseling and your your husband or
wife's committed to working on the
relationship and I'd go yay I
accomplished something next day Bill my
landlord wants to kick me out okay I'd
convince their landlord to give them one
more chance
yay Bill my job wants to fire me can you
help
what they have is a pattern of conflict
behavior that doesn't get resolved and
that's the high conflict families that I
saw in family court so that's where that
connection came from which I would not
have arrived at if I hadn't been a
therapist and also a lawyer my
understanding from reading your book is
that this high conflict personality
phenotype is equally distributed between
men and women what is the percentage of
people that have this high conflict
phenotype and then maybe we can drill
into a little bit of how that shows up
it's different forms of expression yeah
well let me say a little bit about the
difference between high conflict
personalities and personality disorders
because we have a lot of research on
personality disorders including
statistics which I'll give you we don't
have a lot of research on high conflict
personalities people have talked about
it like I said since the 1980s in family
court and my own observations with
thousands of
cases um of high conflict personalities
is it's pretty much men and women my law
practice I represented pretty much 50/50
uh men and women mostly custody disputes
mothers and fathers so I got a good
impression personality disorders there's
a lot of research on
and and I mentioned in the book some
statistics and they came from the
personality disorder research so what
they found they studied the 10
personality disorders in the early 2000s
a big study National Institutes of
Health um the alcoholism subdivision of
NIH they wanted to see how prevalent
personality disorders were with
substance abuse with domestic conflicts
with criminal Behavior behavior and
workplace
conflicts and so this study they looked
at all 10 personalities came up with
numbers for each five of them seem prone
to high conflict
Behavior so these five I can give you
statistics on and I can give you
breakdown male and female all from 20
years ago big study because it hasn't
been repeated since so basically cluster
B that's uh
narcissistic borderline antisocial
histrionic but we see a lot of paranoid
in legal disputes and some research says
paranoid personality disorder is the
most likely to sue their employer of the
personality disorders so that's gotten
attention to so here's some numbers
first of all narcissistic personality
disorder they found found was about 6%
of adults in the United States they
found the statistics on that was 38%
female and 62% male so that's more
heavily male 20 years ago could be
different now because of environmental
influences borderline also about
6% this was 53% female 47% male almost
50/50 and that shocked the mental health
world because we've always thought of
borderline as a female
disor but Marshall lahan the big name in
treatment for borderline says she agrees
she thinks that's true and I think
that's true as a family lawyer because a
lot of the men that we see engaged in
demestic violence seem to have the
borderline personality pattern and the
domestic violence is much more male than
female then um
antisocial it's around
4% and that's about 75% male 25%
female histrionic it's about
2% and they found this is about 5050
which again surprised people because you
think drama center of attention all of
that but and this may be very much
environmental influence our culture
today teaches especially young men to
try to get attention do you know ride
your skateboard behind a car or jump off
a building do all these dramatic things
to get attention or social media and
social Medi really encourage that
everyone wants attention and now you
kind of have to fight for it in our
culture and so men as well as women are
getting out there
often in dramatic ways so it came out
about
50/50 paranoid it's about 4% came out uh
I think it was 57 to 43% somewhere right
around that a little more heavily
female but not all that far apart
altogether it's really roughly
5050 very interesting and how does this
high conflict personality cut through
all these personality disorder
phenotypes um because oh and I should
also ask I could imagine that some
people who are borderline perhaps are
also histrionic is that possible to fall
into multiple categories okay and and
the study actually broke down some of
that so in the research they
particularly one that I remember is
borderline and narcissis and it came out
around 38% overlap so and I teach people
who are borderline also can often be
narciss have narcissistic personality
disorder I see and so this is
personality disorder overlap now there's
a whole Continuum here so many people
have traits but don't have a disorder
the current DSM says the total
personality disorders is around
10% now that's taking an average of
studies from around the
world the study I quoted earlier in the
US said 15% have a personality
disorder so in in in the US we're seeing
that's that significant that's the one
that said 38% overlap Border Lines and
narcissists I think that's that it fits
for me because when I teach lawyers from
my own experience I can say you have a
client that comes on like a narcissist
they're very self-centered and putting
you down saying they're Superior here's
some tips to deal with them but they
also may have wide mood swings which is
more associated with borderline so you
need to butter up their ego honestly not
you know praise them for something
that's real that they did but also they
really need empathy they have white mood
swings that's someone that needs a lot
of empathy and say wow I can see how
upset you are this is so important and
they calm down so you have to use both
sets of
responses to deal with someone that has
that com combination you mentioned
borderline and hisonic there's a lot of
similarities so we see over overlap with
that but I've seen every combination but
what I don't know in family court is is
it the disorder or just traits and the
disorder doesn't matter to me it's the
pattern that matters because if i' see
this pattern I know I should do that
that's the
key I can imagine that in family court
it's especially complicated given that
some of these things not all but some of
these have a genetic component certainly
a situational component so you could
potentially be dealing with um trying to
work out a situation for the benefit of
children that have some of the same
personality disorders as their parents
could be uh really tricky well what's
interesting and it's very rewarding work
when things can go well when the lawyers
get it the judge gets it the uh everyone
gets it what's happening they can make
orders that fit the situation and help
protect children from bad behavior and
help get parents some help so like
substance abuse is is a bigger issue in
Family Court than personality disorders
but almost neck and neck we talk about
substance abuse all the time openly
there's treatment everyone recognizes
the signs we don't talk about
personality disorders in our culture and
that's like flying under the radar so AR
I'm just going to pause you for a second
there I think it's such a key Point um
you know in a very interesting paper
that you sent me which by the way I'll
provide a link to in our show note
captions great it essentially kicks off
by saying that you know the um the
movement toward explaining to people
what alcoh I think they now call it
alcohol use disorder alcoholism right
was is in the 1970s and 80s was a
crucial move forward for the judicial
system yes and I think nowadays people
generally understand that addiction is
not just a lack of willpower right that
there are brain circuits that become
hijacked by substances or behaviors that
these brain circuits were designed to
promote our adaptive Evolution but they
can be hijacked by behaviors and
substances that render people really um
just unable to control their their
addictive behavior I think nowadays that
that box is checked and it's wonderful
that the judicial system understands
that right because then it can work with
that um I don't think that the general
public has yet come to the full
appreciation of these personality
disorders and these high conflict
personalities and how pervasive they are
um probably because of their prevalence
it's just sort of all around us and in
all sorts of interactions and here's the
question high conflict
interactions tend to be quote unquote
dramatic yeah and there tends to be a
almost a reward for dramatic Behavior as
you said online in politics in the media
the more dramatic the more salience the
more salience the more people click the
more people watch and then the
algorithms are designed to look at you
know like dwell time which is nerd speak
for how long people look at stuff and so
you could see how this stuff could be
fed in the same way that for nearly you
know 75 years leading up to the 1970s
alcohol use disorder was sort of fed by
the culture you have your 5:00 p.m.
happy hour yeah coming up in science I
would go to Scientific meetings and it
was like okay five o'clock hits let's
all drink and I always thought this is
kind of crazy especially given that
there was also a lot of concern about
the kinds of interactions that drinking
can create in the work environment it
needs to high conflict Behavior exactly
so anyway I don't want to riff too long
on this but first of all this is just
Laing the important work that you're
doing second how should we think about
this high conflict personality phenotype
should we be calling PE people out like
you know hey that's a narcissist hey
that's a uh you know that's a borderline
histrionic person or is there a more
um I guess something that Embraces a
little bit more of the humanity and the
and the real issue at hand I think
that's what you're trying to do yeah
absolutely and you may have seen me
shaking my head no and said should we
point this out to people that's the last
thing you want to do in fact don't do
that and the reason why
is is personality disorders oh oh let me
just quickly distinguish between
personality disorders high conflict
personalities the difference is and
there's a chart in the beginning of the
book with two circles overlapping a lot
of overlap but the main thing about
personality disorders is they're stuck
in a narrow range of interpersonal
Behavior so some aren't high conflict
people some are thing about high
conflict people is that they're
preoccupied with blame that blaming
others is a big part of their life so
when you're dealing with a high conflict
person who's blaming and has a
personality disorder you get a stuck
pattern of behavior you get high
conflict personalities or high conflict
people so they're persistent in acting
that way that's the overlap with
personality disorders is they don't
reflect they don't change they just keep
blame as everybody out there so
recognizing
that difference and similarity so about
half of people I think with personality
disorders and this is just my estimate
have high conflict personalities and
about half don't I've worked with Border
Lines in the psych Hospital narcissist
that don't blame other people
narcissists that are just self-centered
but and borderlines who are more
frustrated with themselves than anybody
else so that that's an important
distinction you beautifully distinguish
between high conflict personalities and
these personality disorders and I just
want to make sure um everyone hears
again that about half of people with
personality disorders would fall into
this high conflict personality in my
estimation I don't have research yet um
and the the distinguishing feature seems
to be that high conflict personalities
are often or constantly casting blame on
others for the difficulties of their
life essentially and that's why they
have conflicts that's why and they
escalate instead of getting worked on
and resolved so I can imagine that the
high conflict person doesn't always
appear as high conflict in fact this is
something that you've alluded to many
times already in this conversation and
certainly in your book that sometimes
these high conflict personalities come
in kind of under the radar and that can
be confusing to people or they can go
undetected for a long time yeah so part
of it goes with the specific personality
so high conflict people with borderline
personality traits or histrionic
personality traits are often more openly
dramatic and so they they might really
shock you that suddenly they start
yelling screaming uh throwing things
just because you're having an average
conversation very
disproportionate but some and it tends
to be more of the antisocial
personalities some narcissistic
personalities can look really reasonable
on the surface and they've actually had
a lifetime of experience at looking good
which kind of covers up all the stuff
under the surface and I think of of a
couple examples so for example and I
deal sometimes with domestic violence
cases so let's say an abuser says in
court says oh well I was helping her
because she was so upset I took her keys
away and I held her down on the bed cuz
I was afraid she would leave and get
into a car crash well there may be rare
occasions where that's true but that's a
common story that we get from domestic
abusers um or in court I've seen this uh
where there'll be a very reasonable
person kind of explaining the
situation and their partner more often a
woman is just emotional is a mess maybe
even in tears and people don't realize
about 80% of divorces in court today
people represent themselves and so
there's these
conversations and the judge is like well
this guy's being really reasonable and
This Woman's a mess I mean you know I'm
I'm going to go with what he's saying
and so a lot of stuff slips under the
radar that way but gender wise it could
be the reverse and a lot of
relationships people get into people
make themselves look look really good
and then the negative stuff comes out
weeks months maybe a year later so
that's why we say wait a year until you
decide to commit because nowadays who
knows you may have someone that really
is good at covering their bad behavior
yeah let's hover on that one particular
point because this is perhaps one of the
most important takeaways from your work
um could you just um spell out this
first year principle um and
perhaps it's useful for us to also
acknowledge that yes there are a great
many truly great stories about people
who met one weekend two weeks later got
married and then we're hearing the story
50 years later when they've got
grandkids and great grandkids they
thrived or people me met got engaged
three months later or you know some
cases got pregnant 3 months later and
they have this wonderful marriage and
family story to tell we hear these
stories and they're really wonderful
stories right I mean they they sort of
uh affirm your belief in humanity when
you hear those stories and they are
powerful but in discussing a little bit
of this with you offline you probably
have witnessed more cases where people
rushed and the rushing to uh commit or
to create led to more problems than it
did good yes and that's many many of the
highight conflict divorce es that I've
worked on as a lawyer and before that as
a therapist and sometimes as a mediator
are in my mind kind of the bad luck
stories got a decent person usually my
client of course but something happened
they got together too fast and then all
this stuff came out and I really believe
in today's world that it it is a matter
of luck and that's why you should take a
year to find out
am I did I draw the Short Straw in this
relationship because I got this perfect
looking person um great record all these
good things but close relationships is
where personality disorders come out
interpersonal difficulty and the high
conflict behaviors mostly close
relationships so they might everyone
might like them at work but when you're
home alone with them they could be
really terrible yelling hitting doing
all of this stuff so that's why we say
wait a year i' I've had a lot of cases
where people tell me we just just fell
in love it was beautiful and everything
was wonderful for about six months and
then when I committed to get married all
this stuff started showing up but I got
married anyway because I figured well
time and love will heal everything only
it didn't so in today's world there
there's a higher risk of getting a high
conflict relationship I must say and the
description you gave is what people
often tell me they say my
grandparents got married a week after
they met and they just celebrated their
60th anniversary they're still in love
everything's wonderful your grandparents
tended to know who they were marrying in
today's world not only don't you know
you don't have a history but high
conflict people have learned to cover up
the full range of who they are and
they're not bad people and that's
something I want to emphasize they just
have a different personality and they
may have been born this way but they
don't come with with markings you know
they don't come with the music like of
Jaws do do do they look good and anybody
I think is at risk of falling into a
relationship like this I'd like to take
a quick break and acknowledge our
sponsor ag1 by now many of you have
heard me say that if I could take Just
One supplement that supplement would be
ag1 the reason for that is ag1 is the
highest quality and most complete of the
foundational nutritional supplements
available what that means is that it
contains not just vitamins and minerals
but also probiotics prebiotics and
adaptogens to cover any gaps you may
have in your diet and provide support
for a demanding life for me even if I
eat mostly Whole Foods and minimally
processed foods which I do for most of
my food intake it's very difficult for
me to get enough fruits and vegetables
vitamins and minerals micronutrients and
adaptogens from food alone for that
reason I've been taking ag1 daily since
2012 and often twice a day once in the
morning or midm morning and again in the
afternoon or evening when I do that it
clearly bolsters my energy my immune
system and my gut microbiome these are
all critical to brain function mood
physical performance and much more if
you'd like to try ag1 you can go to
drink a1.com huberman to claim their
special offer right now they're giving
away five free travel packs plus a year
Supply a vitamin D3 K2 again that's
drink a1.com huberman to claim that
special
offer I definitely want to come back to
this point that you made that you're not
demonizing these people right you're
talking about how to behave with them or
how to not behave with them in some
cases in order to um try and create the
smoothest possible interactions in some
cases no interaction but if we could um
hover still a bit more on this first
year idea my understanding is that no
getting engaged or for that matter
married no conceiving children and no
moving in together in year one is are
those the critical except for the last
one is it's really don't commit like
getting married within the first year
sometimes moving in together is a good
way to find out what it's like up close
with this person yeah you learn a lot by
living with somebody that's right that's
right and personality disorders part of
the definition is interpersonal
dysfunction and that's close that's
close relationship so if you haven't had
that close relationship you don't see
what happens when you leave your socks
out or the Caps off the toothpaste and
some little thing is some huge storm or
when somebody's sleep deprived I always
say you can you learn a lot about
somebody after a bad night's sleep you
end that
right right you know but the key is
patterns of behavior so one thing I want
to say is everybody gets angry sometimes
that's that's fine everybody yells
sometimes everybody you know criticizes
sometimes but if they have a pattern
like their life had pattern of
relationship is to yell and scream and
criticize and all that whoa this pattern
is probably going to keep going and as I
mentioned earlier I believe with person
ality disorders it's a narrower pattern
of behavior so it's more pattern driven
in several different settings family
maybe at work when it's close maybe in
the community when it's close so these
are recognizable patterns as
recognizable as alcoholism and addiction
once people learn so that's the key give
yourself some time see if this stuff
comes to the
surface think you're raising a really
interesting point which is that although
nowadays we have more information about
people Available To Us by way of the
internet and social media you made the
comparison with our grandparents era I'm
49 years old so my grandparents actually
my grandparents knew each other from the
time they were like in the eth grade
they eloped when they turned 18 uhuh Bo
when and got married I think to the
dismay of one or side or the other side
of parents but then we're married more
than 50 years
yeah and grandkids obviously I'm one of
them Etc and so you have these stories
and and we we love these kinds of
stories yeah but as you point out they
knew each other very very well and had
for a long time nowadays one can quote
unquote do their research um go online
and and look for things but would you
argue that that's not complete
information right I think it can be
helpful um you know I tell people Google
your partner and find out you know if
there's some there that may impact you
but don't don't believe that's
sufficient what I say what you really
want to talk to is relatives and Friends
of this person and what you really want
to do is see them in action with
relatives and Friends Rel relatives and
Friends yes CU that's close
relationships that's the key this is all
about close
relationships and that's what catches
people by surpris they say this person
looks good at work some people have
worked together for 10 years
and maybe they were in other
relationships and they both got divorced
commiserated with each other they get
together and it's like we've known each
other for 10 years you know we're going
to have a great relationship and they
find out this is like a stranger almost
because it's a close relationship now
and that's the difference how people
behave in a close relationship often
triggers like personality disordered
stuff fear of Abandonment fear of
looking inferior fear of being dominated
fear of of not getting enough attention
the personality disorders seem to have
excessive fears in these
areas is it fair to say that if somebody
has a lot of stable friendships over you
know long periods of time that that's uh
a good indication um that they can
maintain close relationships but it
seems to me you'd also want to know like
what is a close friend to that person do
they actually spend time with them you
know um do and likewise with co-workers
because some work environments that I've
been in are necessarily very um uh
non-personal you don't share much right
whereas other environments like I know
the partners of everyone I work with now
at the podcast that wasn't true for my
academic colleagues I knew some of my
academic colleagues families I would
have dinner with them Etc but some of
them less so so context matters a lot
yes right and and i' say you mentioned
the word stability and that's really a
key so if they have close friends
they've had for 10 20 30 years that's a
really good sign um bad signs are I
don't want you talking to my family
they're evil people they'll say terrible
things about me you can't trust them
they'll end up they'll turn on you
they'll hate you all this stuff you
can't even ever talk to my I can't even
let you know who my family is and what
their emails and phone numbers are oh
goodness that's a warning sign yeah
definite warning sign because everyone
has conflict with family members at some
level but you would hope that one could
um would feel comfortable allowing you
to like interact with their family yeah
and if you if your family is really
difficult introduce your partner to your
family and let them see this is a
difficult family and this is why I had
to distance from them because a lot of
people to be healthy do have to get some
more distance but it's that
secretiveness it's the um just secrets
in general are not a good thing for
relationships you that's that's the
biggest piece that's missing in a way
compared to 50 years ago when people
knew all there it was hard to have
family secrets 50 years ago now even
though people may be all over the
Internet you might really know their
secrets and that's what you need to find
out what about advocates
so you know I'm familiar with some high
conflict individuals um some are more of
the combative type others are more of
the kind of um what did you call it sort
of quiet manipulative victim playing
type and um both seem to be pretty good
at generating Advocates um I guess you
call these negative Advocates people
that will fight for them yes right by
the way this is all sounding a lot like
modern politics um uh and uh we'll get
into that a little bit um because it is
an important reflection on what we're
talking about but what about these
negative Advocates if somebody has a lot
of um friends or Advocates that they are
kind of like on their side against that
are also in a blame mode yes is that a
red flag yes what's interesting and and
I I I'd like to tomed day learn more the
Neuroscience behind this but high
conflict people have heightened emotions
the cluster B personality disorders are
known as dramatic emotional and erratic
that's the dsm5 TR says that the manual
for mental health professionals and so
their heightened emotions are
contagious and in general what I've
learned about this work a lot is
emotions are contagious and high
conflict emotions are highly contagious
so what happens and I see this so much
as as a lawyer and with other lawyers
and with
therapists is the high conflict person
comes into your office and says I've
been terribly treated by let's say my ex
you know man or woman because it happens
to both been terribly treated and you've
got to save me you've got to protect me
you've got to win you've got to
sometimes they say you have to destroy
the other party that's always a Warner
something when their goal is to destroy
the other party it's not a good sign but
they're so emotional you say my goodness
this person's been through so much now I
have the
emotions and what I teach in my seminars
is I understand has a lot to do with the
amydala that the amydala catches the
intense fear intense anger that those
are heightened and so now mine's going
oh Bill you've got to do something I'm
I'm like my body wants me to take action
and I want to save this person from
their evil uh co-parent for
example and so what we see with negative
Advocates is they're emotionally hooked
but uninformed they don't really know
what's going on and I'll give you an
example a court case with a high
conflict person um brought their whole
family and and I had a case with false
allegations terrible allegations my
client happened to be the father the
mother was making false allegations of
child sexual abuse and I've had all
types of true cases false cases so this
is a real problem a real issue but there
also were false allegations in this case
that's what was happening so the the
mother brings her whole family and the
judge realizes what's going on in the
case because of the evidence presented
and sanctions the mother for knowingly
false allegations what is that equate to
in the legal system so my client the
father spent like 40 about $40,000
getting a psychological evaluation
having a trial doing all of this
attorney's fees and so the court made
her pay $110,000 of his attorney's fees
and costs so that's what the sanction is
and there's a Code section that said
knowingly false allegations of child
abuse are a basis to make one party pay
the other party's fees so she's order
pay she never paid it by the way and she
owned no property we weren't able to get
it because she had property and other
people's names but the idea was that she
brought her whole family there she
brought her mother mother's boyfriend
she brought her roommate who was a
psychology grad student
who was like encouraging her oh your
daughter's being abused you've got to do
something these were all negative
Advocates and when the judge made her
ruling and spelled out the information
that was very clear I mean we caught the
mother lying she persuaded other people
to lie for her we caught them in lie so
it was a really surprisingly open
case and and the family started yelling
at the judge I said this is this is a
crime and this is a shame and blah blah
blah the judge said you take yourselves
out of here immediately or I will have
the BFFs take you out and that they
stood up and left and shouted this is an
Abomination or something like that these
were the negative Advocates they didn't
know what the full picture was they
believed their family member who was a
skilled liar I believe and this is very
interesting I got to talk to her
therapist a therapist she had I was
released to talk to her and the
therapist it was in the open was she has
borderline personality disorder and that
was an open
thing and and the therapist said and
there's something else and I said
antisocial personality disorder and she
said I can't say but I wouldn't disagree
with you which is effectively a yes yeah
and with antisocial that's where you get
a lot of lying and stuff like that it's
a rare case but since I have the social
work background and I've had many true
cases of child sexual abuse especially
as a
therapist I can see the difference
whereas a lot of lawyers don't know what
to look for but this was an exceptional
case antisocial and borderline
personality disorder she had a lot of
traits and at first the judge was very
critical of my client and us and he
would had supervised contact but the
supervisor said this is
fascinating when the child would be
exchanged the girl would like kind of
walk kind of tentatively towards the
father the mother dropped her and left
superviser brought her to the father she
was like kind of tenative she'd see the
father and she'd look the mother's out
of sight she jump on him laugh and have
a wonderful time I do have um one uh
question it's not a a litmus test qu
question but do you recall from um the
particular case you were just describing
whether the relationship had started
very quickly had they uh moved in
together quickly uh decid excuse me had
they decided to have children together
quickly married quickly in other words
um was your client oblivious um because
of the rate at which he were moving and
the the analogy that comes to mind is if
you're moving very fast it's hard hard
to read the the road signs I think he
did and and what's interesting is they
got together when they were quite young
I think maybe she was 18 he was 20
something like that he pretty young by
today's standards yeah and so excitement
new all of that I'm pretty sure they did
and what's interesting is they they had
gotten divorced that the issue I
described was an after divorce custody
issue but they had gotten divorced
maybe four or five years into their
marriage and she assaulted him and he
had the scars and all of this so he had
actually custody of this girl who was 8
years old when the story I just told you
happened which is also helpful because
she was verbal she could describe she
actually described how her mother
coerced her to say things that weren't
true but yeah so they got together young
I think quick then they got to divorced
but the patterns continued and that's
one thing we see a lot of high conflict
divorces keep going even after the
divorce the actual divorce date is like
a speed bump in the lifetime of high
conflict if they have children together
hence the uh weight to have children
with somebody yes uh if possible yes uh
you asked about emotional contagion and
you made reference to the science um if
I may I'll just share something that
might might be of interest to you and to
the listeners um you're certainly right
that the amydala is a central hub for
threat detection um what a lot of people
don't know because it's just not
discussed enough in the popular coverage
of neurosciences that the amydala can
learn in the sense that it's highly
prone to context dependent plasticity so
you know this idea that getting
emotionally charged is either negative
veilance like fear or positive veence
like Oh I like that that's true to an
extent but over time the brain changes
to in some cases like the feeling of
adrenaline to get a an Associated
dopamine released with that but a really
interesting set of brain structures that
um aren't discussed enough I'll just
mention because they're um because you
asked about Neuroscience I had a postdoc
in my laboratory by the name of hiong
jong a fantastic postdoc who was looking
at emotional contagion we were
interested in human subjects but these
were animal studies you know by one by
one uh member of a species is observed
and then mimicked by the another member
of the species a very powerful aspect of
human and non-human uh behavior and
there's a structure in the brain called
the claustrum most people don't know
about it which seems to be critical for
this and um and she did a beautiful set
of experiments of showing that um when
animals observed other animals either in
a positive or a fear state but in this
case a fear State they would or a
threatened State their own clrm to
anterior singulate cortex circuitry and
of course amigdala etc those would light
up as if they were in the experience but
not to the same degree but over time
what one could see was a kind of a
heightening a plasticity of these
circuits so that smaller um threats
started to create larger internal
responses that's both combining he
Young's work and and other work that's
come out since so um what it says is
that our brains are very tuned to the
emotional states of others this is good
empathy for instance
um but that over time we can our brains
change to actually um require a lower
stimulus to activate that that kind of
um negative Advocate Part of ourselves
yes and and so perhaps this is a good
segue into a discussion about what we're
observing societally now not just in
terms of politics but you know it's one
thing to be recruited to a camp but then
once you're in the camp it turns out if
you if we think about through the lens
of this work it seems that it requires
less um negative stuff in order to stay
in that camp but want to fight more and
more um strident in order to protect a
cause does that make sense I think
exactly and as I mentioned in my book
about bullies I think polarization
really demonstrates that so once you're
in your group and you see the other
group as not only having a different
point of view but as the enemy then your
brain doesn't need to work on it anymore
that's case close they're the enemy the
only question is what do we do now and
the the research saying that when you
when you talk to the people in your
group rather than coming together you
move farther
apart and to me what's fascinating in
terms of legal cases and especially in
family law is you have like the family I
described you have the family talking to
each other you pull a lawyer into that
the lawyer talks to them the lawyer gets
heightened uh anger maybe or commitment
to save this person and maybe you get a
therapist into the picture and they all
just talk to themselves they pull
farther and farther apart and that's
often when we have our high conflict
court case they come back to court every
6 to 12
months sometimes for years I have cases
where people have been in court like
every year for eight or nine years and
and these are cases where the divorce
was done long ago what people don't
realize is the worst custody disputes
tend to happen after the divorce is over
and I think it's because people are
spending more and more time talking to
their own team to their own group and
that pulls them farther apart their view
of the other
side is worse and worse and
worse and that's why I think the
structure really matters so so I think
politically we have we have these two
different universes that not necessarily
talk to each other and they really
create a sense of community people are
looking for community and they find it
but it's fed by I think the media
ecosystem everyone has their own media
and so we have these two universes
talking to themselves growing farther
and farther apart and that's why
elections don't seem to have made a
difference in any of this CU elections
kind of decides who does government but
they don't resolve the adversarial
communities and they get a lot of
attention and sad to say I think our
culture has shifted from government uh
that Politics as about government and
the details in nitty-gritty and the
values of government are what's good for
our group good for our country Unity
citizenship we should be together in
this that politics have shifted to
entertainment the values of
entertainment are be extreme be
emotional um and entertainment's driven
by drama you know for thousands of years
and drama is opposing us against them
and as I mentioned in the bullies book
there's a terrible crisis there's an
evil villain and there's a superhero and
if if you have someone tell that story
to their Community they will love that
person so now we have two communities in
politics loving themselves and hating
the
other and the elections don't resolve
that that's a speed bump on the road to
high conflict and that's not a good sign
and we have to find ways to bridge the
gaps and there are ways you get people
onetoone talk to each other there's a
lot of groups trying to say let's let's
connect rather than separate and if we
get too far out of balance we going to
have bigger and bigger high conflict
problems so we have to the more people's
eyes are open to this pattern the more
they can say hey I seem to be part of
this group but I want to you know my
neighbors think differently I'm going to
listen to them it's listening that's
missing I'd like to take a quick break
and thank one of our sponsors function I
recently became a function member after
searching for the most comprehensive
approach to lab testing while I've long
been a fan of blood testing I really
wanted to find a more in-depth program
for analyzing blood urine and saliva to
get a full picture of my heart health my
hormone status my immune system
regulation my metabolic function my
vitamin and mineral status and other
critical areas of my overall health and
vitality function not only provides
testing of over a 100 biomarkers key to
physical and mental health but it also
analyzes these results and provides
insights from from Top Doctors on your
results for example in one of my first
tests with function I learned that I had
two high levels of mercury in my blood
this was totally surprising to me I had
no idea prior to taking the test
function not only helped me detect this
but offered medical doctor informed
insights on how to best reduce those
mercury levels which included limiting
my tuna consumption because i' had been
eating a lot of tuna while also making
an effort to eat more leafy greens and
supplementing with Knack and
acetylcysteine both of which can support
glut
production and detoxification and worked
to reduce my mercury levels
comprehensive lab testing like this is
so important for health and while I've
been doing it for years I've always
found it to be overly complicated and
expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the tests done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function health.com huberman function
currently has a weight list of over
250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to hubman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to function
today's episode is also brought To Us by
David David makes a protein bar unlike
any other it has 28 gram of protein only
150 calories and 0 gram of sugar that's
right 28 g of protein and 75% of its
calories come from protein this is 50%
higher than the next closest protein bar
These Bars from David also taste
incredible my favorite bar is the cake
flavored one but then again I also like
the chocolate flavored one and I like
the berry flavored one basically I like
all the flavors they're all incredibly
delicious now for me personally I try to
get most of my calories from Whole Foods
however when I'm in a rush or I'm away
from home or I'm just looking for a
quick afternoon snack I often find that
I'm looking for a high quality protein
source and with David I'm able to get 28
gram of high quality protein with the
calories of a snack which makes it very
easy to hit my protein goals of 1 gram
of protein per pound of body weight and
it allows me to do so without taking on
an excess of calories as I mentioned
before they are incredibly delicious in
fact they're surprisingly delicious even
the consistency is great it's more like
a cookie consistency kind of a chewy
cookie consistency which is unlike other
bars which I tend to kind of saturate on
I was never a big fan of bars until I
discovered David bars if you give them a
try you'll know what I mean so if you'd
like to try David you can go to
david.com huberman again the link is
davidpro
docomo on the uh suggestion of my friend
and former guest on this podcast
two-time guest Rick Rubin um I started
watching a documentary about the history
of professional wrestling which everyone
agrees is made up so let's just
acknowledge that I recognize that um but
it's a remarkable portal into some of
the things that you're talking about
because um it all hinges on being able
to create emot responses in the crowd
and just a very brief history of it as I
understand and I'm by no means an expert
but I took notes on this documentary as
I do um take notes on most everything um
they used to have good guys and bad guys
good gals and bad gals yeah you know um
because it's men and women's wrestling
um typically not against each other
although sometimes in any case there was
a transition that occurred at some point
where they couldn't get more excitement
and um literally couldn't get more
attention to the sport by having good
good guys and bad guys good gals and bad
gals so what they ended up doing was
making everybody bad and the ratings
just
skyrocketed everybody bad right the the
underlying premise being that both teams
are cheating and so therefore they had
to to behave poorly also and it created
this whole era of just just bad people
doing bad things generating even greater
emotional responses yeah and this fits
very much with the Neuroscience of
emotion yeah um emotions like awe
Happiness joy meaning pleasure these are
powerful emotions and I will not say
because there's no data to support the
idea that fear anger um being threatened
Etc are more powerful emotions but they
tend to drive more Behavior to in other
words people will do more this is well
known in the field of Behavioral
economics too people will do more to
avoid losing something right than they
will to gain something sadly but this is
how our species is wired
for Meaningful reasons so the point
being that I think societally and
perhaps interpersonally because the two
things M mimic each other at every level
individuals on all the way up to to
culture seem to be engaged in this like
increasingly Amplified emotional states
and now it just seems like
combat is the rule of the day and and
it's so sad and you kind of have to
wonder where it goes next but it does
seem like it rewards these high conflict
personalities because they go undetected
right so now the the coworker who's
super angry about something they saw on
the news and is trying to engage people
or something or create an issue around
something that like is this really an
issue I mean there's some real issues in
the workplace and at school like is this
really an issue like that person 10
years ago everyone would have been like
this is a problem person and would have
backed away now it just kind of um
because the the the mean has shifted I
think it goes it's no longer signal
above the noise it's as we say in
science within the noise right well what
we're seeing is the the these kind of
media systems I call them are attracted
to high conflict personalities and
high-conflict personalities are
attracted to attention they want
attention so there's this almost
marriage of of media exposure and high
conflict
personalities and so
that's what what what pulls people
together there's like I think everyone's
looking for Community these days and it
used to be around work like a shared
task but now we do so much of our work
alone or tiny groups and so you get a
real sense of community people used to
get it from from church or synagogue or
mosque wherever and that's weakened and
so we get that now a lot the intense
emotional Community from politics
and so there's a community for you and
there's a community for you so they pull
themselves together they get that that I
don't know dopamine hit or whatever it
is um and strengthens them so what's
happening is we're pulling apart but to
me the answer is exposing the patterns
and understanding our brains is
recognize what's happening this person's
probably exaggerating when they say that
you know those people are evil this
person's probably exaggerating when they
say those people are stupid whatever it
is that we have to realize okay don't
don't buy that completely and what's
fascinating to me I don't know how it
happened but I get text message
solicitations to contribute to
campaigns from conservatives and
liberals I get both and guess what they
look like each other and they're like
the end of the world is coming
you've got to give $10 or $100 to save
the world and the end of the world's
coming because of them it's all
fear-based and it's fear-based but it
hooks your emotions I know this stuff so
I can get okay swipe swipe swipe swipe
away but a lot of people don't know that
this is happening they don't understand
how emotions are
contagious and how I think high conflict
emotions are more
contagious so to me it's educating
people about these Dynamics so you don't
engage so much with them like I won't
watch more than half an hour of TV news
but you can have 247 TV news and
since
1995
1996 when they allowed
um um they they gave you licenses for
radio and television that didn't have to
tell the other side of the story before
that you used to the the fairness doct
you have to say what the other side is
you're for a candidate you have to hear
from the other side you didn't have to
after 1995 96 so we had like MSNBC and
Fox News slightly off center slightly
conservative slightly liberal well now
we've had 30 years of that much farther
apart and communities around each of
these and yet if you go okay I'm
probably hearing some exaggerations here
so I can check myself and this person's
trying to be a hero and demonize those
people I'm not going to do that so I'm
not one for government regulation what I
want is for everyone to be able to say
okay I see what's happening I'm not
going to get my emotions hooked and I
think to me that's one of the goals is
for people to learn I don't have to
absorb the emotions because that's where
the problem is people are emotionally
hooked and uninformed
formed what are some of the signs of a
high conflict personality um because in
an Ideal World we avoid these people and
again we're not trying to say that
they're bad people some of them are bad
people some of them aren't but um since
I'm not a clinical psychologist you are
you can make the assessment um uh
certainly better than I can what what
are some of the ways to avoid these
circumstances besides the first year
rule um and then let's talk about some
ways to disentangle from these people
right um based on their unique uh
phenotypes so is there a question or set
of questions one should ask themselves
when they are potentially um dating
someone potentially becoming friends
with somebody potentially becoming
co-workers with somebody and so on yeah
so what's interesting is often your gut
feeling tells you something up here like
the person suddenly has a shocking
opinion of somebody else they say you
know you know that person's a total jerk
and yet you know that person and they're
not a total jerk they suddenly
something's disproportionate I think
disproportionate um emotions is often a
trigger I put I put in in a lot of my
books now what I call the web method is
pay attention to their words your
emotions and their behavior so starting
with words do they use a lot of blaming
words words you know it's all that
person's fault um is do they use All or
Nothing words they seem to see things
through a narrow lens that you know
there's all good there's all bad um
unmanaged emotions which they may or may
not show like I explained some people
are good at hiding all that even though
it drives them inside and the extreme
behaviors do they do things 90% of
people would never
do and I'll give an example here and
this is um I I won't say the city but
there was a
mayor there was someone who worked who
was a congress person and they decided
to run for mayor in their City instead
of flying to go to Congress but when
they were flying to go to Congress back
and forth this is in California I'll say
that
much people can easily research this so
this person flying back and forth one
day one night standing you know there
was a line to get your bags at the
airport after you got off the
plane and and he was told to wait in
line to get his bags and he said don't
you know who I am and he pushed his way
to the front of the line and had an
argument with the person behind the
counter said don't you know who I am I
want my bag right now and she said we
don't have it now can't have it right
now and he pushed her and knocked her
over he shoved this this Airline worker
behind the counter and knocked her over
this was a mayor of a major not yet he
wasn't mayor yet he was a congress
person anyway so that means he's sorry
no no knock I know some some very decent
Congress people but like okay um well in
any case right this person could be any
number of different professions like yes
yeah this is antisocial Behavior but
this is a high high a uh profile person
so this is in the all over the news the
next day this is um 20 years ago maybe
15 years ago something like that
goodness anyway so it's in the newspaper
the next day and newspaper says
Congressman so and so gets into physical
altercation with uh Airline worker
knocks her
over half the people said that's
terrible and the other half people said
wait wait he was sleep deprived he was
flying across country you have to
understand that he was stressed and
here's where my web method comes in 90%
of people would not have done that even
if they were sleep deprived and I fly
back and forth a lot and I'm not I'm I
don't do that I I would like to think
99% of people do that I think you're
right 99% get physical with an airline
person over a b The Cutting to the front
of the line is is egregious the the
shoving the airline person is like
Beyond The Pale yeah exactly so this is
so anyway so he's running for mayor and
I'm going this guy's a high conflict
person if he gets elected he's not going
to be a very good mayor he's going to
have a lot of trouble with the people
close to him and so guess what happened
he gets
elected within I think a eight months he
is and this is before the me too
movement got started but people are
reporting he's harassing women sexually
harassing women women come into his
office to meet with him professional
experienced important and he's like
wanting to touch them a lot
inappropriately think they don't want to
be touched
um anyway so women start complaining
about him word kind of gets out yeah
this happened with a lot of different
people that he's he's not sexually
assaulting them but he's he's treating
them badly so it cuts across domains
it's like in so so it's it's not just in
the office it's it's it's there but it's
also at the airport it's it's basically
anytime he's not getting what he wants
he he throws a tantrum and and that's
the thing with with personality
disorders is a narrower range of
behavior that's repeated in a variety of
settings so he's fitting all of that so
which personality just s I'm not going
to diagnose him but it Narrows down to
one or two so it's not context dependent
it it is right it's pervasive pervasive
and that word is in the diagnostic
manual that it's pervasive across I
think several settings I think that's
the words but let me let me just finish
so because the end of the
story the end of the story is he's also
um got committees and people that are
supposed to accomplish things he doesn't
want them to think he wants them to he
wants to do the thinking and tell them
what to do so he goes around alienating
a lot of people within eight months he's
out of office because enough people were
upset and the way he got out of office
is some of the heads of government told
him uh I think it was the City attorney
or something if you quit now we'll help
you with with your legal expenses cuz
he's starting to get sued for some of
this stuff suing the city suing him we
help you with your legal expenses if you
quit now and there was starting to be a
petition movement for some I don't know
the mechanics like a special election or
something to get rid of him anyway
within eight months he was out of the
office and now you don't hear about him
in that City it's a very interesting uh
literally high-profile although still
Anonymous based on this conversation
case um I wonder if on a more um subtle
or typical level the following is
informative or not I'm not looking for a
validation of the example I'm about to
give but I've been um very surprised at
times how um
if a person who I'm with for the first
time out on a meal will behave towards
the weight staff yes not explicitly
disparaging of them but sometimes mildly
disparaging of them or um feeling as if
uh the amount of of liquid poured into
their glass was somehow an indication of
how the waiter felt about them or didn't
feel about them like read like reading
into these things where you're just
thinking to yourself like whoa life must
be really tough for you like who's
paying attention to this stuff and um
and so that that's that's one that I've
noticed in in people um and it's and
it's proved informative it's really a
useful thing to see that's part of what
you see their behavior and their
behavior towards other people this was
it was a brilliant thing I don't
remember the name of of the program but
there was a guy who was head of a
company and he used to when he was
interviewing people for highlevel jobs
he pretended he was a taxi driver or
something would pick them up at the
airport as as the taxi driver and see
they treated him as the taxi driver and
then he gets in the interview room and
he's the guy interviewing them and in
some cases people treated him really
disrespectfully and it's like now I know
this is not someone I want clever I made
the decision to not work for um somebody
years ago um when I was on the different
very different stage of my career based
on how that person treated a janitor
yeah and it was amazing because it was
one very brief interaction and it wasn't
like this person yelled at the janitor
yeah it was the kind of dismissiveness
yeah um and I remember it was this your
web approach it was um it was his I
guess I just just revealed it was his
words towards the janitor it was my
emotional response was s of like I felt
like i' had been kind of kicked in the
stomach I was like Hey like that was
like it just felt like a like a a very
un what I would call like the football
play unnecessary roughness yes it was
mild from the perspective of like no no
one got physical or called anyone names
but it was but I remember thinking like
oh like that sucked right and then their
behavior was just to just go right back
to what they were talking about and I I
knew in that moment I was really
crestfallen because in that moment I
knew oh my goodness I can't work for
this person yeah like I just can't and I
made the decision not to and actually
their response to my deciding not to for
a variety of other reasons too confirmed
everything that I suspected in that one
little interaction yes but it's
interesting because we're trained to um
collect data rather you know carefully
you know and we don't want to we don't
want to make snap judgment somebody
could truly be having a bad day but in
this case it was it was the right
decision to not work for them thank
goodness I thank my lucky stars make
some really bad decisions about people
in my life that was a really good
decision uh I never spent a day
regretting it and I went to work for
someone else who was terrific instead so
but as you said these things sometimes
hit at a at a somatic level as opposed
to some sort of um wait did you know
some like very cerebral analytic thing
it it kind of hits at a what must be a
very primitive circuit I can't help the
neuroscientist in me wants to say like
it's got to be something at the level of
the body where we go wait that was
messed up yeah and and you can't really
point to a specific word and then you
start to question yourself that's the
problem you you wonder was well maybe
their tone wasn't maybe it's my own
perception but I don't know maybe maybe
the body doesn't lie maybe it knows I
think the body is like a first responder
and that we should pay attention to that
and especially with high conflict
personalities
especially the con artists which is part
of antisocial personality and the ones
I've dealt with are very good at this is
their words are just right and your
brain is like soothed by them you go
this person get it and I'm totally
comfortable they're Charming all of that
and your gut goes wait there's they're
out of sync I have this cold feeling why
do I have this cold feeling and I think
that they're they're aimed at your your
cerebral thinking and that your guts
kind of gets it because they're in a way
predatory like antisocial tend to be
predatory those people have dead eyes
I've known a few yeah known a few men
and women and their eyes are I can only
describe and I'm a vision neuroscientist
that's like what my the career has been
and those are two little pieces of brain
right there and there's something about
the the deadness and and I don't have a
science to support what I'm about to say
there's something about the deadness in
their eyes maybe their pupils don't
change shape with levels of arousal the
same way other pupils do because we know
that happens in in healthy people with
an healthy autonomic nervous system but
there's something lacking yeah um and
people make up all sorts of theories
online like I'm not a big blinker um I
don't BL when I'm concentrating blinks
break up my flow and and this is
actually a way I can remember things
people have these theories about
blinking non- blink the research doesn't
support any relationship between blink
frequency and personality they had this
whole theory about Zuck too like he
doesn't blink therefore he's whatever
he's a robot none of that holds up what
does hold up however is this mismatch
between words and the affect that it
creates in US yeah it's like it sounds
right but it doesn't feel right I wish
we understood more about this at the
level of science there are a lot of
theories not a lot of not a lot of tools
someday I think yeah yeah the tools for
measuring the stuff are getting better
um I want to to ask you about other ways
of of just knowing if you're interacting
with a high conflict person um when the
cues are more subtle are there other
things um or examples of the web method
that that come to mind
well for me of course dealing like with
cord especially there's a lot of stuff
in writing and so being able to look at
what's written and lot of blame words
the All or Nothing words she did this
and she did that and disparaging words
she's stupid or whatever or He's a Bully
he's this and that which triggers for me
maybe he is or maybe the person saying
it is but it heightens my attention yeah
how do you disambiguate between
projection and a real thing like online
now I mean one of the most pop one of
the fastest ways to get a popular social
media account is for somebody to give
advice about how to avoid bad people you
know name calling gaslighting narcissist
sociopath psychopath um hist onic like
these these are clinical terms that now
the general public can leverages to like
you know sort of amplify community and
then in part I understand from talking
to people on the tech side is that
social media is social right the
accounts that grow fastest are the ones
where you don't need much language to
convey what you're trying to convey like
a a sport or dance or an animal that and
among the others that grow very quickly
um and therefore rewarding to people are
ones where there's um where you're
recruiting these negative
Advocates first of all I want to make
sure
that I get this point across and that is
there's a lot of Temptation to label
people with like the mental disorders
the personality disorders and it's
absolutely essential that people don't
do that if you think somebody might be a
narcissist or might have borderline
personality or be antisocial keep that
to yourself and adapt how you work with
them to be more effective or be more
cautious whatever but the worst thing I
think is people say oh and and everyone
agrees that person's a narcissist so we
kind of gang up on that person that's
not helpful the goal is not rejecting
people the goal is adapting what you do
to either manage the relationship decide
okay that's not someone I'm going to get
close to but you know I can still work
with them or have them as neighbors or
whatever so I want to emphasize that
because I think you're right there's a
lot of that today and people come to me
with that concern say Bill you teach
about personality disorders yes so
people understand patterns of behavior
and how to adapt your own behavior I'm
not teaching people to label other
people so that's real
important um yeah people go to school
for many years and do 3,000 plus
clinical hours to learn how to do that
uh to do that properly it's like saying
uh it's like diagnosing anything right I
mean a dermatologist might be able to
help diagnose a a a skin patch for
potential cancer um but we're taught
that we're not supposed to do that
ourselves right so we have to be
cautious but on the other hand aware and
the more you're aware of patterns like
like being aware of someone with an
alcohol abuse issue is to go okay I'm
not going to be serving him alcohol with
dinner it's a great person but I'm just
going to leave that out of the evening
meal adapt what we do rather than
judging them and I don't see people with
personality disorders as lesser beings I
see them as having a different set of
behaviors that they acquire pretty much
in childhood so I don't hold it against
them I may dislike their patterns of
behavior but I I really don't hate
people like that I've been a therapist
with clients like that so I think our
awareness needs to be there so we adapt
how we work with people but I think the
the gut feeling
is is so important and as a therapist I
was trained pay attention to your gut
because that's going to help you with
your clients and that's why the web
method their words their behavior but
how I feel often gives me
tips you mentioned before and I think
it's really important to highlight that
people's patterns of interactions across
a lot of different domains with the
teachers in the school with close family
members with the people that know them
best at work that these different types
of relationships reveal a pattern and
one of the things just speaking from my
own experience is that uh I've tended to
where I've gone wrong I've tended to
overemphasize the importance of like a
credential for instance um some of my
past uh romantic uh relationships have
been uh with people who are Highly
Educated some less High higher education
all extremely smart people some more
formal some less formal education but I
think that I and other people sometimes
will look at the CV of somebody um and
of course that's not the only uh
indication of of their uh you know their
their values Etc but and to
overemphasize like oh well they you know
did difficult things in a difficult
setting and therefore must be a a good
person like so would you say that these
high conflict personalities exist more
or less in high competition venues
versus low competition venues um I don't
want to make this about socioeconomic
status those things correlate but um but
you know all too often we tend to do the
kind of good on paper analysis yeah and
forget the like how do they actually
measure up in real life yeah I I would
say first of all that we see high
conflict people in every occupation in
every culture and every Community every
economic
status I think
that I don't think there's research on
this but I think that health care and
higher education are two Fields where
there's a slightly higher incidence
higher of high conflict people because
there's a higher to oh also I would say
churches and we get consultations with
churches sometimes there's a high
tolerance
for behavior that that's outside the
norm because so you said higher
education and Healthcare in particular
so you talk about are you talking about
Physicians and universities yes yes so
students and faculty and staff yes both
administrators sometimes and I believe
it's because of the higher tolerance
administrators just kidding I've blessed
with good administrators we we have been
blessed with great administrators let me
yeah let me mention I do a lot of cons
consultation and one of the things that
people come to me about is is people
with little power bases like department
heads in
universities um I remember one
University I did a consultation with
about a department head and they were a
medical school and they had a high
conflict uh person high up in the
structure who was really um I was told
damaging some of the students careers
because they didn't they looked at them
crosy or something like that so they
wouldn't write the kind of
recommendation that they needed and how
can we deal with this person because
they're embedded in their position so
gave them variety of tips but that's
that's why I think people do need to
have their eyes open in these fields and
and I want to add since I'm talking
about occupations we see this a little
bit more in
nonprofits and nonprofit administrators
because again nonprofits are good people
doing good things but they have this
higher tolerance
for administrators of bad behavior
because they're good people and that
blinds people to because of the
Assumption they're good people or
because they're or because the mission
is good the mission is good and they're
invested in this Mission so they must be
good do you think that's part of what
got them there yes and and the the thing
that's so tricky is is it everybody's
somewhat unique but also these are some
recognizable patterns of behavior once
you know to look for them and this is
something we're doing much more in the
workplace now and employers want to know
we want to promote this person is that a
good or bad idea well let's look at the
patterns of behavior because once you
put them in an embedded position things
are going to be harder I've been
approached by City councils they say
we've got somebody on our city council
that's a high conflict person what do we
do do we confront them do we publicly
talk about them all that stuff I say
neither of those is good learn how to
manage them until they move on and they
often do because people slowly go we
don't like working with this person it's
really interesting uh you know when I
was a graduate student there was a
department chair in that department big
Personality yeah like big Personality
yeah and
um I very quickly came to
realize also because I listened to the
faculty that were under this person that
despite having this like big like Larger
than Life personality that you might
initially like Place into a category of
you know like diagnosis or something
yeah that this person was an incredibly
strong advocate for the faculty yeah and
they loved that and he was really
beloved MH and I think rightfully so you
know and um you know at a at a surface
level might have rubbed a few people the
wrong way I think as students we were
like oh whoa like you know it was almost
like I didn't quite know how to how to
like respond respond to it but you very
quickly got the sense of like a real
kind of paternal nature in this person
so I point this out because sometimes
these big
personalities are really truly
benevolent now I'm not saying he was a
perfect human being how could I know
that I don't know that I didn't know him
in All domains of his life although I
did know his family and and he seemed to
have a great strong family too um but
then by contrast I'm thinking of the
person I alluded to earlier different
department different University who was
kind of like More Meek like like
certainly as more of the the
stereotypical lab scientist but then um
you know there was this like interaction
that I observed and I thought like w
like that's really Dreadful at least
that's not an environment I want to be
in so sometimes these things don't match
our initial Impressions I raise this
because sometimes we think big
personality AKA high conflict
personality sometimes we think hey kind
of you know quieter um nerdy type and
they're actually quite Dreadful yeah so
it doesn't always fit it's it's and and
I think the problem with the internet
social media version of this the typical
version because there's some great
social media internet stuff podcast Etc
uh is that we we default to what we see
yeah and what we hear but we we don't
really have the data and we can get
manipulated that way that's that's
what's tricky but but you raised several
important points I want to respond to
them all if I can remember them the the
first is that this is in many ways quite
nuan the key thing to look out for with
high conflict people a preoccupation
with blaming other others and not taking
responsibility so you might have a big
personality that's that's not a high
conflict person you might have a me
quiet person who is a high conflict
person so you can't go by what your eyes
see and your ears hear it's really a
question of evidence and that's why I
think maybe I got into this after I
became a lawyer that there's no way to
quickly know although you may quickly
suspect
and then want to look deeper but I want
to give an example because now that I
seem to have criticized department heads
and and well I cited at least one that
that is really wonderful I've known some
other great department heads I mean
there's some chairs that are just like
these are first of all as a department
head sometimes there's a slight salary
increase usually it's trivial yeah these
people don't do it for the money I have
a good friend who's also been on this
podcast who's a chair of neurosurgery at
a major I mean these are people who they
work their
butts off to try and make conditions
better for patients for professors for
clinicians for staff I mean I'm not I'm
not just saying this I have no incentive
for saying it you know right these
people don't control my life anymore
well I suppose my my chair of opy who's
a wonderful person um it does um Etc but
the point is that there are some people
that step up to the plate to lead that
are really great leaders and these are
just not the people that we're focusing
on today right right and so the thing I
want to emphasize my my favorite example
is Steve Jobs Steve Jobs I would say
hands down was a high conflict person
famous for there was a guy in Silicon
Valley wrote a book The no a-hole Rule
and he talked about Steve Jobs in there
because he knew Steve Jobs he was in
Silicon Valley so I remember reading his
biography like thousand Pages or
whatever and what stood out to me was
that he blamed people sometimes let all
or nothing thinking they talked about
his uh Distortion reality Distortion
reality Distortion field and that's
exactly what high conflict people do
they all or nothing thinking you got to
do this you can do this people say
that's not possible it's physically
impossible Steve you can't do this and
then he would push them and one example
that stood out to me was touch screen
glass that you touch and it knows where
you are I think and I may have it wrong
but from reading his autobiography that
he har ranged a corning wear Glass
Company Corning company something like
that to create that and they said you
can't do it it's not physically possible
he says do it and do it in the next 90
days and they did they invented this
thing that they probably would not have
done unless he pushed them so high
conflict person but I don't think he had
a personality disorder people say oh is
he an incredible narcissist but
personality disorder is characterized by
lack of change lack of self-awareness
lack of flexibility and and they shoot
themselves in the foot and it interferes
with their success he I think was close
to that but he had enough
flexibility and he picked a team that
pushed back on him and he liked that so
he's an example to me of high conflict
person
probably not personality disorder and
successful because he probably had some
traits of these personalities so what I
see is you totally have to look for the
evidence that you can't make an
assumption but if your gut says maybe
something's off here pay attention to
that but look for the facts talk to
other people that know this person see
them in other situations because there's
incredible people like him that that
that accomplish a lot of really good
stuff that you don't want to say oh we
can't have him Apple fired him in the
1990s and he seemed to learn from that
he seemed to grow from that people with
personality disorders don't seem to grow
and change and that's that's their
problem they're stuck high conflict
people they blame others if they have
some traits maybe you can do a
workaround so there's many people in
position surgeons are one group I want
to mention briefly because as a clinical
social worker I worked in hospitals and
dealt with doctors a lot as a lawyer
I've represented doctors and their
divorces several I think are high
conflict people but most aren't and
that's what I want to say most
departments heads aren't high conflict
people most surgeons aren't high
conflict people even though they get a
reputation for that um police is another
area military is another area probably
slightly higher incidents because
they're in a position where they can
Dominate and control people but most
police aren't like that most people in
the military aren't high conflict people
they're professional people they like
their job they know their job they have
empathy they work with people so even
though some of these occupations there's
a higher incidence and that's certainly
true for lawyers I think but most people
most lawyers aren't like that most
lawyers I know are really committed to
their work really want to help their
clients so I I want to kind of be clear
that this is nuanced stuff but when
you're hiring people when you're getting
into a dating relationship you want to
watch more closely because it's the
close relationships where high conflict
Behavior comes out more so the web
method seems like a very good method um
as well as paying attention to um and
maybe getting some information from
other people close to that person in
different domains of their life that
that seems like a very like Sage way to
approach this exactly and because when
you hear from different people the same
problem then that should raise your
antenna okay a lot of people say yeah
but this person can be really irritable
and you go okay oh they're IR itable in
different settings I'm going to think
about that what about when somebody is
already involved with a high conflict
person and they want to
disentangle um I could imagine a couple
different scenarios let's um say
disentangle from a professional
relationship disentangle from a personal
relationship probably some overlap there
but slightly different let's assume the
high conflict person is a high conflict
um uh victim
type then let's compare that to if the
high conflict person is more of a
combative type maybe we'll start with a
combative type so if you're dealing with
a combative maybe even dare we say
narcissistic type I don't know that we
should diagnose but but the The
Stereotype that comes to mind somebody
that that gets angry when you don't
fulfill their
expectations um and blames others does
not take responsibility and it's time
you decide to uh like the Homer Simpson
meme kind of drift back into the Hedge
um is that the way to do it or do you
lay a clear line and say listen um I'm
not going to tolerate this anymore I'm
out it's really somewhat dependent on
the nature of relationship I do a lot of
consultation we do a lot of training
with high conflict Institute so we get
you know married people getting divorced
we get business port Partnerships where
there's one partner that they going we
got to deal with this we have employees
trying to get away from from a high
conflict supervisor and we have
supervisors trying to deal with a high
conflict employee so the slightly
different um settings you know that the
most common situation is going to be
where somebody has a friend or a
romantic partner um or a business
professional partner they want to get
get out of so I suppose any of those a
close so a partner kind of relationship
something where the person expects to
hear from you yeah on a fairly regular
basis expects things from you could be
professional things could be personal
things but where there's an ongoing
expectation that you show up emotionally
physically
financially whatever yeah so first of
all we strongly recommend against the
Direct Hit is don't tell the person look
you do this this and this and that's
terrible and I don't want to be I don't
want to work with you I don't want to be
in a relationship with you I don't want
to be close to you because of your
behavior that high conflict people puts
them through the roof they will defend
themselves and for the next months or
years they may put you in litigation
they may uh stalk
you depending on your relationship ship
they they they will hate you for that
they'll blame you they will blame you
and that fulfills their picture that
it's all your fault and now look you've
you have violated the most basic thing
is that you will never blame
me so don't blame
them second thing is don't blame
yourself because that reinforces to them
like if you say you know I just can't
you know I'm a sensitive person and I
just can't um you know keep up with you
um I know I'm defective and I know I'm
I'm no good at this this and this and so
I I just have to end this relationship
and I I so much apologize it's all my
fault you know I it's I do everything
wrong and I'm going to go really look at
myself and get some therapy and I'm so
sorry but I just can't you know keep up
with you you're such a a really good
this this and this and and I just can't
keep up with that well they're GNA blame
you for that and you're depending on
their personality if they tend to have
borderline traits they're going to feel
abandoned by you they have narcissistic
traits they're going to feel um put down
by you they're going to because you're
supposed to see them as Superior if they
have antisocial traits they're going to
feel like wait a minute you know you're
supposed to be submissive to me
and and yet you're walking away so you
don't want to blame yourself so you're
going to go well what's
left what's left is we aren't a good fit
um our goals have gone in different
directions um I'm really ready for a
career change um I want to go back to
school or you know I just realized I'm
I'm not ready for a committed
relationship so it's not about you and
it's not about them it's not about blame
you want to try to keep it away from
blame now some people say it's dishonest
to to not tell them
everything and let's talk about brutal
honesty high conflict people really love
brutal honesty and they'll tell you I'm
just being honest you're stupid or a
jerk or whatever that's high conflict
people reasonable people don't tell
everybody every negative thing they
think that's just not healthy for
relationships so it's okay to
say you know we seem to be going in
different directions or I have different
plans I've realized I want to
change so those are basic
principles um the worst thing in ending
a relationship or reducing
contact is to go back and
forth um the worst thing is to pour out
your feelings to the person I have this
people getting divorced and they tell
I'm so sorry and I love you so much and
that pouring out your feelings to
someone brings them closer to you so you
want to start holding back some and the
other person say well let's work let's
go to counseling let's do this and if
you're not sure go to counseling I
recommend that but if you're sure just
say you know I'm I'm kind of not there
anymore I really need to be more on my
own so don't go back and forth because
that really makes it raw and sometimes
pre- sages violence um in divorces is
the a high conflict person especially
with some of the personality disorder
traits can't hle the opening and closing
opening and closing so but the other
thing is I say do it in steps so the
person can adjust
uh you might say you know I'm I'm
thinking about making a career change or
I'm thinking that maybe this
relationship isn't the right one for me
anymore um so the person gets used to
the idea this may be coming to an end
and then um I'd like to move out and um
have more time alone to think and then
you're at a safe distance and you say
I've thought about it and and we really
need to get divorced and let's go to a
divorce mediator I want to be amicable
you know I don't hate you in many ways I
still love you but we're just not meant
to be a couple anymore um if there's
kids involved then you know I really
want us to have a supportive
relationship for them if there aren't
then maybe this really is the end but
it's it's step by step so this person
can adjust to the fact that you really
are leaving but not too long and not too
many steps because then their
expectations are raised oh maybe you're
not really
leaving so these are general principles
depends a lot on the specifics yeah that
was very helpful um in reference to the
high conflict person especially not
placing blame on them I mean I suppose
in your own mind you can hold all the
the Litany of reasons why they they are
a terrible choice or I guess more
typically if we're realistic yeah it's
not going to be all black and white
right I mean one would hope that at the
first sight of really egregious Behavior
people like I'm done but typically it's
a mix right I mean this is you know
professionally personally it's it's
often a mix yes and um you know I've
certainly observed this professionally
where people you know wanted to collect
the degree or they were three years into
a degree and like leaving was it's it's
always an option and yet sometimes it's
not an option they have you know plans
and financial obligations and you know
sunk cost is a real thing people always
talk about sunk cost like oh that's just
sunk cost sunk cost is a real thing so I
think um okay so with the high conflict
person I think you you beautifully
Illustrated how to um not blame them not
blame yourself internally you can hold
any reasonable understanding that you
come to but you don't have to share all
that and then you don't want to at in
decision but that perhaps things um some
staging of the exit um not staging a
theatrically uh rather staging meaning
uh in stages uh um increments would be a
better word what about with the high
conflict victim playing person that
seems like it's a little trickier um let
me back up a minute cuz I want to say
there's sometimes where you just need to
get out and do it all at once right and
don't
um ease yourself out serious physical or
emotional risk yes so you may need to
get away before you hint that I no
longer want to be married to you and
I've I've worked with people consulted
with them on established you know moving
out when the other person isn't there
they and the kids go to a safe place
they've got their lawyer and then they
tell this person that I'm getting
divorced from you because people get
killed when they SE operate with certain
high conflict domestic violence people
so also in the workplace sometimes
they're going to destroy they're going
to send emails they're going to be
really destructive they may you might
say I'm going to leave in a month and
and they're so angry that they're going
to really destroy your business well
this is why in the professional setting
they're they're uh forgive the word
because it's associated with this
podcast often but there are um protocols
for this in the in the workplace where
if you have to let somebody go um it
there's a a sequence of steps and
sometimes it involves telling people you
know go home we'll ship you your things
that's one extreme go home now and
there's somebody waiting to escort you
out type thing other times it's you know
listen you're going to finish out the
month but you're going to finish that
the month out at home other times it's
hey you're welcome to stay and continue
to to participate but by X date that's
her final day so there's any number of
different variations on these themes in
the professional setting and it sounds
like there's any number of different
variations in the personal setting to
it's nuanced and that's where getting
consultation having a therapist a lawyer
a high conflict consultant someone that
you kind of walk it through with maybe
even practice what you're going to say
with a third party Observer seems really
key right often just for for peace of
mind yes right so yeah
so mostly gradual but sometimes fast
really
depends now you asked about the person
who plays the victim and I would suggest
that that's very common with high
conflict people that when aggressive
behavior doesn't work they switch to oh
how can you do this to me that I'm so
sad and what's interesting the word that
I didn't come up with this other people
came up with in divorce settings where
let's say you're divorcing someone with
high conflict
personality and they they were like I
hate you I hate you don't leave me kind
of
personality and so you know I'm
divorcing you and they're like you know
rage at you and then no I'm I'm really
leaving then they switch and beg and
plead and I've I've got cases where
people say and and you know my ex to be
just seduced me and some I went along
with it CU it felt real good and it's
back and forth from the high conflict
person and they call it hooing you go
hoovering where did that word come from
the Hoover vacuum oh what happens is
they vacuum they suck you back into the
relationship and it's very common with
some of the high conflict personalities
they can't stand to lose you and when
rage doesn't work then they try to
seduce you back in and some people have
allowed themselves to get back in and
that's that's not good you've got to be
ready for that don't be surprised by
that and don't give into that if you're
sure it's over if you're not sure it's
over get couples counseling and see
where it might go I know a number of
people who um let's just say conceived
children very in close proximity to the
ending of the relationship and therefore
there was no end to the relationship
until several years later yes I don't
know of a single case where that led to
a Persistence of the
relationship um for better or worse so
um this sounds like it falls under the
the rubric of of hoovering right people
are leaving and then they end up you
know one more time or or just to try and
make the the pain go away type thing and
um and then they're bringing you know
more of an attachment I mean obviously a
child is is a forever tie as they say um
so
uh yeah I wouldn't say it's the majority
of cases for sure but it's it's a common
symptom with high conflict people and
you and you hit on it it's like they
can't handle the pain and so they really
bring the P bring the person back in but
if this is the direction you're going
you need to let them start coping with
the pain either step by step or if it's
dangerous all at once but don't go back
if you can help it
these are very uh helpful um they're not
even tips this is very useful
information for for everyone listening
I'm I'm sure they agree we had a guest
on this podcast Jonathan height who's
written the book anxious generation the
codling of the American mind um and he
mentioned some statistics that younger
folks so high school and younger have
seem to um lost or are losing the
capacity to arbitrate among themselves
that um now more typically if there's a
conflict um and here we're we're
assuming not extreme conflict or or
anything criminal but where there's a
conflict between two kids at
school and they bring it to the
authorities when I was growing up that
was called tattling right you were
called a rat and it got you semi-
ostracized if you did it you learn
quickly don't do it either you learn
directly or you learn by observation you
don't be a tattletail
he claims that nowadays there's more of
this um lack of ability to arbitrate and
and you know kids you know calling out
other kids publicly or publicly and that
parents are doing it now too and this
seems worrisome in in that it seems like
it would Foster these this group
segregation and cultivating through
emotional contagion you know blaming of
others and negative uh NE negative
Advocates I mean I I don't want to blame
social media for everything because I
love social media for certain things I
exist on social media for a number of
things that I believe are truly
benevolent so I'd be a hypocrit if I
said I didn't like social media love
social media for certain things but are
you concerned about this I mean this
seems like a real issue I mean that the
profession of law exists because of a
lack of ability for people to arbitrate
among themselves but that's not what
we're talking about here we're not
talking about people bring in therapists
or lawyers to really help mediators
we're talking about just people going to
the to the authorities are online and
trying to create some drama for what to
what end yeah I think in some ways to
some extent that's high conflict parents
who see everything in All or Nothing
terms see their kids as as offended by
other kids um or they're protecting
their
children and and I am concerned about it
and I also agree it isn't just social
media in many ways I've been watching
this since families got
smaller so I remember growing up most
families had several kids the divorces I
do now often have one or two kids and
that's been true in many ways since the
1970s and a lot of it has to do with
birth control so don't just blame social
media also blame birth control that when
people could decide how large a family
they have they decide to have smaller
family so birth control pills came out
in the 60s and the 70s suddenly we
started noticing people are having two
kids and by the ' 80s 90s 2000s a lot of
people have one kid my most high
conflict divorce cases have one kid
because it's hard to share one kid it's
a little bit easier to share two kids
it's a lot easier to share four kids
it's like you can have them for the
weekend I'm not going to fight with you
about that please take
them and the small family and this is I
think structurally a lot the fall small
family structure is feeding parents
becoming in messed with their kids some
parents and so their kids become their
Partners especially in these high
conflict divorces now dad's a bad guy
mom's a bad woman and the child
especially often the oldest child now is
my best friend my my kind of Junior your
partner in the world and that's where
you see a lot of you start getting
alienated kids now they hate dad and
mom's perfect or they hate Mom and Dad's
perfect parental estrangement is growing
yes um like crazy as a as a phenomenon
we're heading towards the holidays in a
few few weeks and months and this is
going to come up um I actually did an
Instagram live with a a really skilled
therapist named Matias Barker um who
specializes in among other things um
parental estrangement yeah it's so
common now people kids just deciding I'm
done with my parents right and it's
partly the culture is fulfilling that
that we're now seeing everything in like
opposing terms All or Nothing terms Etc
and the big message I want to get across
with this with all parents and kids is
it's a question of skills that the kids
aren't growing up with the skills to
manage the nuances
and so we teach a lot of our skills and
we teach parents teach these to your
kids in divorce flexible thinking teach
them flexible thinking teach them manage
emotions teach them um to ma to moderate
their behavior teach them to check
themselves wait a minute am I doing
something here rather than always you
you you and we developed a method we
call it new ways for families which was
designed high conflict divorce cases for
both parents to kind of learn these
skills and practice either with a
therapist or a coach or just watching
online and typing in
answers to practice these four we call
these the four big skills for life and
this is I think what parents need to
teach their kids is you can solve that
problem tell me what happened okay let's
talk about what you could say to Johnny
and we teach skills we call ear
statements empathy attention and respect
statement that shows that and so we
teach parents teach your child you know
your best friend who just broke up with
you might be feeling Hur about something
maybe something they said what can you
do so we encourage kids to help their
kids manage the situation and we
encourage them to manage their
relationship with the other parent they
come back from uh
visitation or access from a weekend
let's say with Dad and and child says
you know Dad didn't look at my drawing I
drew a picture and dad didn't look at my
drawing high conflict parents say oh
your dad's a jerk you know I always
hated that about him a reasonable parent
says oh that's sad well you know what
next time um if he doesn't look at the
picture right away maybe wait an and
then show him the picture again maybe he
got busy maybe this or that teach your
child to manage the
relationship even with the other parent
and those parents don't have high
conflict divorces high conflict divorces
have the other your dad's a jerk you
know forget about him he'll never pay
attention to you and that's when you see
parents estranged or
alienated of the kids alienated from the
parents so you think that with
increasing number of siblings kids learn
how to work things out among themselves
that's another big part of it is you
have to find out how to share so I had
three siblings and we grew up and and
it's fascinating you're one of three or
you had three others I'm one of four so
I have three that's that's a good siiz
kit a brother two sisters so four and
what's fascinating for me and I think it
helped shape my personality and approach
the life is we grew up without
television we didn't have something to
to watch after school we had to deal
with each other so you know we might
play kickball in the backyard or we
might read or something or other but we
had to learn conflict resolution with
each other and our parents were like you
know you go talk to your brother Bill I
don't have time to hear your
complaint yeah and so
structurally it's shocking going from
that to doing people's divorces with one
or two children and even two is is
better than just one cuz they do learn
to share but parents parents feel so
guilty today and that's our culture is
really not fair to parents I think um to
know that you know teach your child ways
to deal with it themselves I'll say I
have one sibling uh we get along
terrifically well we're we're
exceedingly close but I can recall when
we were kids if we were getting into the
scrap my mom or dad would say just sort
it out among your ourselves just don't
get any blood on the carpet it was like
that it was like that but then again my
mom's from New Jersey and so it's like a
different style right um anyone from New
Jersey will understand that was a joke
um but the point being that um we
learned pretty quickly how to sort
things out my sister and I have had a
few conflicts over the years but we get
along terrifically well we vacation
together for our birthdays every year
like we're um but both of us had a lot
of friends in the neighborhood right I
grew up in a neighborhood with a lot of
boys my age she grew up in a
neighborhood with a lot of girls her age
and so I quickly learned in that big
pack of boys and then I entered Sports
and got involved in things where it was
like big packs of boys like that's just
kind of how it worked out eventually
young men and and then men that you know
you you couldn't say certain things or
it was you it was going to mean trouble
yeah you get punched in the face say
that right but nowadays that would be
considered like oh goodness and you know
like wait obviously not a proponent for
violence but there were you learn I
probably learned at 14 that there were
certain things you didn't say to friends
you get into the scrap with them and
then you'd remain friends right um and
so we arbitrated among each other but
also just had a share how to um you know
we would um I don't recommend this cuz
I'll well whatever we used to do these
like dirt CLA Wars where you throw dirt
at each other's heads like like you know
and um and occasionally someone would
throw a rock and cut some kid and then
but that kid who threw the rock would
get in trouble
with us it's not like we turn him into
his parents you just kind of knew like
he plays dirty and then he wouldn't play
dirty again or if he did then he kind of
knew it like you got there was just sort
of an understanding of of how people
sort it out in groups this is and this
stuff hearkens back to primitive
circuitry that's present in all Old
World primates right chimpanzees in
particular I always tell people if you
want a really good watch and you want to
learn about human behavior watch chimp
Empire the Netflix series because it's
basically the the it's it's the core
circuitry of the primate brain in action
how people team up how they cooperate
how they then all the human behaviors
pretty much are there except the
technology development those chimps
aren't building rockets and and electric
cars but they're engaging in all the
sorts of of behaviors both hierarchical
and non-h hierarchical romantic and
professional so to speak chimps have
professions too um to to bring about
cooperative and non-cooperative behavior
and sort it out it's fascinating
and The Chimps are our closest relative
I think yeah as far as I know I mean I
have friends who are like really into
the genomics of all this stuff so I want
to be careful that's getting but I
believe so they are Old World primates
we are Old World primates so there's
there's a common lineage there for sure
yeah yeah but but I I want to really
reinforce what you're saying is about
the community of learning and kids
growing up in the community of learning
and it I think it plays a role with with
bullies
because what happens is the the
community of kids figures out who
bullies and confronts them with their
behavior and people ask me well are
adult bullies because my book is about
adult bullies were they bullies as kids
and I'll say it seems to be pretty
universally they were as kids but most
kids try bullying at least once and they
grow out of it because they get feedback
they learn that's not going to work
you're not going to have friends
um I'm not going to be around so bullies
learn to either change their behavior or
to Live On The Fringe of the group if
they don't change their
behavior and so part of why we're seeing
more adult bullies today I think is
because they used to be on The Fringe
because or they they learned how to get
along but if they were On The Fringe
because nobody liked them and they
didn't change their behavior what we're
seeing to today is bullies are finding
each other and this is one of the
negatives of social media I think and I
agree there's a lot of good things but
this is one of the surprising things
when I researched my book bullies are
finding a group for themselves and
instead of the group teaching them not
to be a bully the group reinforces being
a bully says you were justified in doing
that and one of the shocking things is
to find that School shooters have a
support system online really that they
seem to some of the research says they
always have a Social Media Group they
have peers that they're trying to
somewhat impress and that may actually
egg them on and that if they track down
they find these folks have and I think
they should look for that find out who
they've been talking to who they
communicate with and so what I think
we're seeing is Bully are reinforcing
their bad behavior rather than social
pressure for them to learn good behavior
which is for me I'm I've done a lot of
group therapy I've treated people that
go to Alcoholics Anonymous Narcotics
Anonymous and the group reinforces and
teaches them good
behavior but bullies are finding other
bullies and reinforcing their bad
behavior and that's an issue we have to
address especially with young men
is they we have to get on top of that
and redirect them into
socially um pro-social activities and
most people don't realize that I didn't
realize that now that comes as a real
surprise to me as well are there um
female bullies and male bullies online
or is it more typical that there are M
groups of male bullies online I haven't
heard about female bullies finding each
other um well actually actually I should
take that back and this is gets into a
sensitive area about personality
disorders but borderline personality
disorder is one of the more treatable
personality disorders and people become
aware that they have this disorder a lot
from internet
information but what seems to happen
there's a couple stages for them they
become aware before they change their
behavior and like like DBT dialectical
behavior therapy is a really good
treatment for that but therapists and
and my wife was a DBT therapist said
that they become aware of it before they
change their behavior so they do
self-sabotaging things even though they
shouldn't they I know I shouldn't do
this but and then finally they learn to
change their behavior well some people
are discovering their borderline and
finding other people online and
reinforcing their borderline view of the
world there's evil people and good
people and occasionally they write
reviews of my books and say how awful a
person I am because I talk about
personality disorders even though I say
don't identify anybody and I believe
personality disorders in most cases
could be helped if they're open to that
so I think there's some degree of of say
female people with that personality
finding each other and reinforcing that
behavior but what I what I read was and
I I cited in my book in the uh uh I'm
trying to remember I don't remember
which chapter but that that some
researcher at a university said look for
their social media connections and
you'll find that there was a
reinforcement of this Behavior rather
than people saying hey you can't do that
you've got to cut it out one of the best
pieces of advice a colleague gave me was
when I um started teaching in the
university to undergraduates this was
prior to my arriving at Stanford where I
am now um I had this big class and uh
this colleague who's a neuroscientist
very esteemed neuroscientist but also
trained as a psychiatrist he's an MD he
said Just remember the statistics on uh
very psychiatric and personality uh
disorders you know you've got one% of
the population is schizophrenic you've
got 10% at any time that's probably
experiencing major depression you've got
borderline You' got it and he said so
when you look out on your
classroom just understand that you that
it's a not necessarily representative
population but that those um challenges
he posed in the right way he was patient
oriented those challenges um are present
in that population um I mention this now
because it's something to keep in mind
anytime one goes onto social media and
reads comments yeah you're you you have
to run those comments through the filter
of what we know about the frequency of
of those of those challenges for people
so um which is not to say that every
negative comment is coming from somebody
that's borderline or right sociopathic
but there's a there's a high probability
that that if somebody is is um is
continuously doing that especially in
the blame game type scenario that um
that that's what's going on there
something I want to fit in here and that
is that uh we need to understand that
people with personality dis ERS didn't
choose to have them and so I have a lot
of compassion for people like that
and I have I've so I I have a lot of
students over the years and and they
write reflective journals and
occasionally they put in their Journal I
was diagnosed with borderline
personality disorder and I remember this
one woman said so when you talked about
borderline personality disorder was a
little uncomfortable for me but I found
it helpful
and she was actually one of the better
students in the class and so she had
that level of awareness but she was
still working on working on herself to
manage you know the emotional roller
coaster and such and so what's important
to me is some people with borderline
personality disorder may be angry with
me because I talk about it because
they're early stage with this but other
people say thank you Bill that was
helpful and so so there's kind of a
range there but I also want to say three
basic reasons I think people develop
personality disorders the first is
genetic
Tendencies and various researchers say
like 20 to 80% may be the genetic
tendency depending on the person that
early childhood first five years of life
maybe attachment difficulties may be a
driving Factor but also cultural
environment
um some people say the um a researcher
in San Diego wrote the narcissism
epidemic and she says from her
research um that the decade you're born
in influences your personality
development as much as your family
fascinating I don't agree with that
because she's not a therapist and looked
at the mental health she looked at Big
surveys college students especially but
I think that's more significant than we
realize and more significant than I used
to think and so part of what you're
saying is today's culture is reinforcing
not taking
responsibility whereas in the past you
had to solve problems
yourself on the positive side always
good too um it seems that even though
family structures have changed quite a
lot yeah um even though culture is
changing quite a lot
um there's this wonderful feature of
social media and the internet now um
which is in you know what we're doing
right now which is the opportunity for
experts like yourself to come on and and
educate and I think that as we started
off talking about it's probably about
90% of people do not fall into this high
conflict personality category and what
we're talking about what you're
educating us on is how to interact with
this 10% in a way that brings about um
more functionality for everybody more
effective professional personal familial
interactions for everyone it's not about
just ostracizing those with challenges
so keeping with that you
know what should most people you know do
if they are feeling frustrated with um
someone that they feel well for instance
the the you know 80% of your problems
come from 20% of people and this case
where I guess we're saying you know like
90% of problems come from these 10% of
of people but really it behooves us all
to try and figure out how best to
interact with others and so you've
spelled out a number of ways that we can
do that today um if you were to kind of
highlight I never want to pressure but
you know highlight you know one or two
things to just keep in mind as one moves
through the world um the web tool seems
especially effective yeah um is there
anything else that you recommend that we
just hold in mind as we navigate forward
because it's a it's a it's quite a
landscape out there yeah several things
then I can be brief with each of them
first there's what I call the four
forget about it is forget about trying
to give the person insight into how
they're
behaving that blows up the person you
know just like I said don't blame them
for you ending the
relationship so just forget about giving
them Insight instead talk about what we
can do now talk about options talk about
don't don't go inward with them go
outward with them so when you go inward
you escalate their defensiveness so
don't try to give them insight into
themselves and a lot of people say how
can I make him see that what he's doing
is so wrong or how can I make her
understand that she's she's creating the
problem we're trying to solve just
forget about that talk about okay here's
what our options are let's talk about
what to do second is don't emphasize the
past and people argue forever with high
conflict people about the past and you
never resolve the past with a high
conflict person and I'll tell you in a
minute why that may be focus on what to
do now and the future future Focus not
past Focus maybe you need some
information to understand a problem but
then emphasize the future the third is
don't FOC focus on emotions and
especially don't yell at them don't
burst into tears don't tell them how
frustrating they are all of that and
this is what I'm going to tell you now
is a theory that I hope someone figures
out and that is people with personality
disorders and high conflict
personalities don't seem to go through
the five stages of The Grieving and
healing
process denial anger bargaining
depression sadness and acceptance they
seem to get stuck at denial and anger so
what happens is they don't resolve
things they don't quotes get over things
they don't get over the divorce they
don't get over the job loss they don't
get over having to sell their house
because they didn't they couldn't pay
the mortgage they don't experience the
normal human healing and grieving
process so they're stuck and so a lot of
situations with them turn to anger
they're angry but they're not resolved
so high conflict people are constantly
talking about the past and how aggrieved
they are they shouldn't have done that
to me I was right to have done this and
people start not when I say that like
students in my class oh yeah that's what
I see they keep repeating themselves and
they go to as many people as they can
and tell the story I believe they're
trying trying to grieve and heal but
they don't have the mechanism and I
don't know exactly why so I'm hoping
someday Neuroscience will figure out
what connection is missing and can we
give people that so that they can grieve
and heal well what that means is if you
focus on emotions you're focusing on an
area that's unresolved and has a lot of
hurt and so if you say well how do you
feel about that they almost always say I
feel terrible I suggest not saying how
you doing today because the answer I get
is terrible you know what she did
yesterday you know what he did last week
so instead do small talk do it about
anything except about how are you
feeling today so don't ask how you're
feeling focus on thinking and
doing and an example I teach lawyers and
mediators is don't say how do you feel
about that proposal say what do you
think about that could you picture doing
that how could you do that how could
that work for you CU if you focus how do
you feel I feel insulted I feel
abandoned and then they they drown in
that and next thing you know you've lost
them so avoid Emotions Don't focus on
emotions but acknowledge emotions say I
can see your frustration now here's how
I can help you today
the fourth is don't use names don't
label people don't say you're a high
conflict person and lawyers do that to
motivate their clients it doesn't
work don't say you have a personality
disorder you may be wrong and that never
motivates anybody so that's the four
forget about it so that's key stuff for
people to avoid so that was a long
answer but when you're ready I have four
simple tips for things to do was a great
answer um would love to hear the four
simple tips for people to pay attention
to okay I'm so glad you asked that
question so we have what I call the cars
method and we've actually trademarked
this cars method connecting analyzing
responding and setting
limits first is connect with the person
so someone's angry with you or you're
trying to help somebody with their
problem is connect with them by giving
them a statement that shows empathy
attention Andor respect you know I can
see how hard this is um I see your
disappointment I hear your frustration I
can understand by saying I can I'm
showing I see them as an equal rather
than looking down on them so that's the
empathy rather than
sympathy pay attention say I'll pay
attention tell tell me more I want to
understand your
situation and and listen some and so
what I see all the time as people say
it's like oh good because I'm going to
listen to them they don't have to prove
they don't have to fight to get my
attention and high conflict people often
are fighting to get attention because
they've turned everybody off and that's
why I teach lawyers and therapists that
they're going to come to you as much as
anything else to get your attention so
let them tell their story listen to them
acknowledge the emotion so empathy
attention and respect find something you
respect about them you respect the kind
of work they do you respect their
relationship with their son or daughter
or you respect their commitment to
resolving this
dispute so use those words and what's
fascinating is I teach this to people
like who I consult with and then they
come back and say I did that and it
really worked the person calmed down I
had one woman who said um my boss was
giving me a hard time and so I'd run
into my office to try not to interact
with her and I said next time especially
like Monday morning or something is go
up to her and say like you know how was
your weekend and say or say you know I
appreciated the presentation you gave
last week give her some empathy
attention and or respect you don't have
to do all three of these just any one of
these often calms the
relationship and I remember checking
back with this woman a month later and
she says guess what bill now I'm her
favorite employee but she's picking on
somebody else so I gave somebody else
your
book but the idea is connect with people
so empathy attention and respect and ear
statements we call it and people say
they really remember that because you
can use that with anybody anywhere even
with your kids genuine respect
right has to be honest yeah you're
you're not puffing them up yes think
about that now if you don't respect them
and you don't have empathy for them tell
them you'll pay attention and listen and
often you'll start developing some
empathy or or respect for them but you
can always pay attention and listen
so that's connecting the second area and
these aren't exactly steps but these are
four areas high conflict people have
difficulty the second is emotions kind
of cloud their thinking so we want to
help them think so you want to move to
analyzing give them an a way to think so
you're kind of calming the emotions and
now you're saying let's think about this
so present problems as a choice you know
could do this now or do this
tomorrow um or here's the options I see
there's three ways you could approach
this problem so you're getting people
thinking about the problem rather than
reacting and when you give a choice it
kind of forces them into logical problem
solving so one way you can do this is
especially if you have a professional
relationship like employer employee
therapist client stuff like that is have
them write a list they're talking they
saying this is wrong and that's wrong
and that's wrong you say whoa whoa whoa
write write a list of these problems so
I get a clearer picture when you write a
list you calm down and I've had this
over and over again angry people when
they're writing a list calm down they
start thinking about I've done this with
with like like a doctor once he was
having trouble with the nurses and it
was like they're doing everything well
all right right list of all the things
they're doing wrong and pretty soon you
start thinking you know there's this
other thing they do but it's not so bad
actually and I want them to do this on
the leftand side of the page because on
the right hand page side we're going to
start looking at what are possible
solutions and you really calm people
down I've done this as a media I've had
both people okay I want you to write two
lists like business partners now say
you're trying to decide whether to split
up or keep the Business
Partnership so I want you both to write
a list what you would do if you split up
wind down the partnership the steps
you'd have to take and another list what
the steps would be if you could make it
work between
you so let's meet in a week and we'll
look at your list come back a week later
they say you know what we both wrote our
list we immediately called each other
and realized we should terminate the
partnership but we have one last big
project we want to do together and we
realize now we can go our separate ways
in peace we really have different goals
it's not her fault it's not her fault
this was two women who work together and
so writing a list helps this is all
under analyzing the a of the carus
method having the person make a proposal
say make me a proposal I tell managers
as soon as you can tell your
employees that now that I'm your manager
whenever you bring me a problem and I
want you to bring me problems when
they're small because conflicts that are
small much easier to resolve always
bring a solution to the problem I want
to hear your proposed solution because
you know the problem better than I do
you're getting them to think so high
conflict people I believe have a
bandwidth for problem solving and some
are brilliant heads of companies um
inventors all that stuff they got a big
bandwidth for conflict but they also
have a bandwidth for problem solving you
want to aim at that and bring that
out so that's analyzing R is for
responding high conflict people because
they blame so much are always saying you
should have done this you didn't do
that our tendency is to argue with high
conflict people and that's a forget
about it you're trying to give them
Insight it's not going to work so
instead give them what we call a Biff
response that's brief informative just
straight information don't tell them
you're wrong just tell them what the
information
is and do it in a friendly Manner and
have it be firm have it end the
discussion most commonly Biff responses
are in writing and we teach this as an
email method and we estimate there's
about a million people doing Biff now
because we taught it to about half a
million people professionals and
individuals we've got four little Biff
books we've got brief informative
friendly and firm firm and those four
things friendly is is a immaterial well
a touch of friendliness so what I say
like like someone writes to you and say
you know you're doing everything wrong
and you're right back and you say thank
you for telling me your concerns here's
some information you may not like say
someone tells me Bill your methods are
never going to work and I could
instantly defensive and so thank you for
telling me your
concerns um you may not be aware but
about a million people are using this
method now and um I wish you well
something like that so A Touch of
friendliness doesn't have to be a lot
and firm doesn't mean harsh it just
means try to end the Hostile
conversation so don't respond to their
distortions maybe even when they say
you've done this or misinformation or
hostility is just give them a Biff
response and I tell that sometimes
to business owners sometimes public
figures is they might say like
politicians sometimes terrible things
are said about them and they go but
they're not true and they're going to go
well I'm going to ignore that cuz no one
will believe that but then people
believe it a great
example Domino's Pizza about 10 years
ago this is a great story I love it and
I also eat Domino's
Pizza I won't get into the details but
somebody said something that grossed
people out and their stock just dropped
two employees did did something to the
pizza within so first they were going
we're going to ignore that everyone's
going to realize that was a dumb thing
two employees
did well their stock dropped like 10% or
something like that so two days later
the head of Domino's Pizza puts out a 90
second
video and it gets spread around and what
he says is two former employees did this
gross thing and that doesn't represent
us and most important to us is our
customers we're totally dedicated to you
this is never going to happen again
we've done everything to blah blah blah
blah blah so they bounced right back and
in my mind 90 second video didn't do a
20 minute explanation of how we do this
that just 90 second video head of the
company put it out there bounced right
back and to me that was a Biff response
even though we never heard of it brief
informative friendly and firm
so that's uh cars c a that's R that's
the responding what's uh s the S is
setting limits and this may be the most
important with high conflict people
because they one of their biggest
problems is they don't stop themselves
they keep going in areas where most
people stop themselves they keep talking
they talk a lot they create a problem
and keep creating the problem they don't
stop
and
so people around them have to stop them
and we're not used to stopping other
people's behavior most people manage
themselves and part of writing my books
is I believe today that we have more
high conflict behavior and everyone
needs to learn skills to set limits on
on bullies on high conflict people's
behavior it's all about Behavior they're
not bad people but they don't have the
self-restraint
so setting limits and key things here
don't blame them don't blame yourself
say there's a policy there's a rule
there's a law how it looks to people is
do this instead of doing that so that
behavior and if you keep doing that
behavior here's what the consequence
is so I I have a method I call slick so
everything I've got initials got
acronyms that's all right scientists
have acronyms military science and
apparently Bill Ed high conflict methods
so slick is setting limits and imposing
consequences so with high conflict
people you might set the limit like you
say you know I'll give an example as a
lawyer I represented a woman victim of
domestic violence her ex-husband to be
didn't have a lawyer so that means he's
allowed to talk to me I have to talk to
him negotiate solve problems so he calls
me up and he says we've got to solve
this problem you tell that blankety
blank blank wife of mine I said hold on
you can't talk about my client that way
he said I'll talk about her anyway I
want to she's a blankety blank blank or
whatever so he didn't respect my limit
at all so then I said if you keep
talking like that I'm going to hang up
and so it's up to you says I'll talk
about her any way I want keeps talking
like that say okay you've chosen for me
to hang up I'm hanging up now call me
when you're ready to be civil so end the
call next morning he calls me back he
says Mr ready we have to solve this
problem my blankety blank blank wife and
I say hang on remember I'm going to hang
up if you talk like that he says oh no
no no don't hang up we have to solve
this problem I'll try not to say those
words and he doesn't say those words we
get to address the problem so the
consequence is what stopped him not the
limit and I think it's a brain thing
that they're so absorbed in the emotions
of the moment that they can't picture
that their behavior has a consequence so
if the people around them point out
there's a consequence if you do that is
kind of a jolt to them oh I don't want
that consequence and so with high
conflict people you often have to tell
them the consequence when you set the
limit and be ready to impose the
consequence so that's setting limits
imposing consequences they have to go
together with high conflict
people love it and I know that those
listening and watching really appreciate
this I mean these are incredibly
valuable tools I mean I can say from my
own life and I know observing the
experiences of others and what people
have shared with me that
um here I have to be careful because I
don't want to place blame let me phrase
this correctly that um the ability to
navigate interactions with high conflict
personalities well can lead to a
dramatic Improvement in people's lives
both for the non- high conflict
personalities and the high conflict
personalities and that a failure to do
that does exactly the opposite so look
uh really want to thank you for
doing the work that you do as a lawyer
as a therapist the research that you've
done you're you're incredibly well
researched and thorough sent me papers
in advance of this in addition to having
written all these books that we'll
provide links to in the show note
captions I've read several of them but I
plan to read the others as well you have
a a book um specifically on
relationships um you have uh books on
bullies you have a book about uh five
types of people that can ruin your life
um and several others as well so we'll
put um links to those as well as some
other resources related to your work and
also just want to thank you for you know
being a contributor to public education
I mean that's what this podcast is um
people listen to this podcast in hopes
of gleaning information that they can
really apply and that they can pass on
to others and you're doing incredible
work you're also teaching in the
University system later today so you're
quite quite busy and we're deeply
appreciative that you took the time to
come educate us so on behalf of myself
and everyone listening and watching I
just want to extend you know a deep
gratitude thank you're trying to make
the world a better place and you are
making the world a better place thank
you so much I appreciate the chance to
speak with you and get this out great
well come back again and um tell us more
about bullies and the rest there's a lot
more to cover we'd love to have you back
thank you for joining me for today's
discussion with Bill Eddie I hope you
found it to be as interesting and
practically informative as I did to
learn more about Bill Ed's work and to
find links to his various books please
see the show note captions if you're
learning from and or enjoying this
podcast please subscribe to our YouTube
channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way
to support us in addition please
subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify
and apple and on both Spotify and apple
you can leave us up to a five-star
review please check out the sponsors
mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast if you
have questions for me or comments about
the podcast or guests or topics that
you'd like me to consider for the
huberman Lab podcast please put those in
the comment section on YouTube I do read
all the comments for those of you that
haven't heard I have a new book coming
out it's my very first book it's
entitled protocols an operating manual
for the human body this is a book that
I've been working on for more than 5
years and that's based on more than 30
years of research and experience and it
covers protocols for everything from
sleep to exercise to Stress Control
protocols related to focus and
motivation and of course I provide the
scientific substantiation for the protoc
calls that are included the book is now
available by pre-sale at protocols
book.com there you can find links to
various vendors you can pick the one
that you like best again the book is
called protocols an operating manual for
the human body if you're not already
following me on social media I am
huberman lab on all social media
platforms so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter threads Facebook and
Linkedin and on all those platforms I
discuss science and science related
tools some of which overlaps with the
content of the hubman Lab podcast but
much of which is distinct from the
content on the hubman Lab podcast again
that's hubman lab on all social media
channels if you haven't already
subscribed to our neural network
newsletter our neural network newsletter
is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that
includes podcast summaries as well as
protocols in the form of brief one to
three page PDFs those protocol PDFs are
on things like neuroplasticity and
learning optimizing dopamine improving
your sleep deliberate cold exposure
deliberate heat exposure we have a
foundational Fitness protocol that
describes a template routine that
includes cardiovascular training and
resistance training with sets and Reps
all backed by science and all of which
again is completely zero cost to
subscribe simply go to hubman lab.com go
to the menu tab up in the upper right
corner scroll down a newsletter and
provide your email and I should
emphasize that we do not share your
email with anybody thank you once again
for joining me for today's discussion
with Bill Eddie and last but certainly
not least thank you for your interest in
science
[Music]