welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Bernardo
huberman Dr Bernardo huberman is the
vice president of NextGen systems at
cable Labs prior to that he was the
director of the social Computing
laboratory at hulet Packard and he is as
his name suggests my father today we
discuss various topics in science
including relativity Theory chaos theory
and Quantum Computing but I'd like to
assure you that even if you have zero
background in physics computer science
or mathematics that entire discussion
will be clear to you as to what those
things are and even some of how they
work during today's discussion we also
talk about a life of science that is
what it is to spend one's life in
curiosity in trying to understand the
universe around us and how to understand
ourselves indeed today we also talk
about Neuroscience how the brain works
and the different sorts of questions
that I do believe everybody asks whether
you're a scientist or not questions like
where do we come from is there a god
what is our use or purpose in the
universe and how is it that we can
ponder these super high level abstract
questions about how we got here and what
our purpose is and how things work at
the quantum level tiny tiny bits of
things that we can't even see and at the
same time to lead an everyday life that
is meaning ful and joyful we talk about
this in the context of understanding
oneself in relation to others family
community including scientific community
and what it is like to come from a
different country my father immigrated
from South America what it was like to
do science in the United States then and
now cultural differences and of course
we touch on some of our relationship as
well how could we not I must say for me
it was an immense pleasure and
privileged to have this conversation not
just because Dr huberman is my father
but because I believe the knowledge and
some of the wisdom that he shares will
be useful to everybody about what it is
to carve one's own unique trajectory in
terms of career and life and at the same
time how to savor the simple everyday
things that make life so worth living
before we begin I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is separate from my
teaching and research roles at Stanford
it is however part of my desire and
effort to bring zero cost to Consumer
information about science and science
related tools to the general public in
keeping with that theme I'd like to
thank the sponsors of today's podcast
our first sponsor is Helix sleep Helix
sleep makes mattresses and pillows that
are customized to your unique sleep
needs now I've spoken many times before
on this and other podcasts about the
fact that getting a great night's sleep
is the foundation of mental health
physical health and performance now the
mattress you sleep on makes a huge
difference in the quality of sleep that
you get each night how soft that
mattress is or How firm it is how
breathable it is all play into your
comfort and need to be tailored to your
unique sleep needs so if you go to the
Helix website you can take a brief 2
minute quiz that asks you questions such
as do you sleep on your back your side
or your stomach do you tend to run hot
or cold during the night things of that
sort maybe you know the answers to those
questions maybe you don't either way
Helix will match you to the ideal
mattress for you for me that turned out
to be the dusk mattress D us I started
sleeping on a dusk mattress about three
and a half years ago and it's been Far
and Away the best sleep that I've ever
had so much so that when I travel to
hotels and airbnbs I find I don't sleep
as well I can't wait to get back to my
dusk mattress so if you'd like to try
Helix you can go to helixsleep.com
huberman take that two-minute sleep quiz
and Helix will match you to a mattress
that's customized for your unique sleep
needs right now Helix is giving up to
25% off all mattress orders again that's
helixsleep.com
huberman to get up to 25% off today's
episode is also brought To Us by
betterhelp betterhelp offers
Professional Therapy with a licensed
therapist carried out entirely online
now I've been doing weekly therapy for
well over 30 years initially I didn't
have a choice it was a condition of
being allowed to stay in high school but
pretty soon I realized that therapy is
an extremely important component to
overall health in fact I consider doing
regular therapy just as important as
getting regular exercise now there are
essentially three things that great
therapy provides first it provides a
good rapport with somebody that you can
really trust and talk to about any and
all issues that concern you second of
all great therapy provides support in
the form of emotional support but also
directed Guidance the dos and the not
Tod do and third expert therapy can help
you arrive at useful insights that you
would not have arrived at otherwise
insights that allow you to do better not
just in your emotional life in your
relationship life but also the
relationship to yourself and your
professional life and all sorts of
career goals with better help they make
it very easy to find an expert therapist
with whom you can really resonate with
and provide you with these three
benefits that I described also because
better help is carried out entirely
online it's very time efficient and easy
to fit into a busy schedule so if you'd
like to try betterhelp go to
betterhelp.com huberman to get 10% off
your first month again that's
betterhelp.com
huberman and now for my discussion with
Dr Bernardo huberman Dr Bernardo hubman
welcome thank you Andrew and also great
to see you Dad same here I guess no
premonition would have foreseen this one
no absolutely
not and uh people might notice today I'm
drinking out of a mate gourd uh in part
in honor of U my father's father who
drank out of his loose leaf mate every
morning my first sip of mate was taken
on sitting in his lap when I was maybe
four years old yes yes in my Spider-Man
pajamas in any event let's talk about
science you're born in Argentina mhm as
I recall because once we had a
conversation about it you had a teacher
maybe it was in high school who turned
you on to physics which became your
field of choice but prior to that were
you interested in different subjects I I
don't recall if you had an avid interest
in academics or you just did it because
you were supposed to prior to that
teacher then we'll talk about him yes
yes I I was always very interested in
ideas and so on I science at that time
was a bit vague but I I read a lot of
philosophy I was I didn't understand
much of what I read but nevertheless I
kept reading it I was interested in
Psychology um I was an Avid Reader as a
matter of fact I embarrassed my father
or actually made him disappointed when
for a birthday I think I was 14 years
old I asked him to buy me the 12 volumes
of Freud's writings and yeah and he said
what four so but I was very impressed
with it of course I couldn't even
understand half of what these books had
in it uh in them so I was very
interested in in many things and I must
say to you that uh my interest in
science in particular physics doesn't
come from the standard thing that you
see here in the United States mostly
namely I was not a wiiz kid in math um
you know I was not one of these people
that can really do things very very
quickly and so on but I was interested
because I thought that physics was was
going to complement
my uh attempt at understanding how the
whole universe is put together the
philosophers were saying all sorts of
things I went to a very special School
uh that I learned six years of Latin and
so on and I had to read things like C
and cosmogas and cosmogonies and so on
that really didn't mean much to me but
suddenly I started discovering that
physics might be interesting and I I had
a cousin Hector who was a physicist a
particle physicist already I mean he was
living at that time in France and so
there was a little bit of a influence
but my my interest was in in things that
had to do with fairly abstract ideas uh
I cannot believe that at one point or
the other I was very good in um in
geometry class being able to prove
theorems I mean the the teacher was just
said let's prove this and I was somehow
able to reason through and come to you
know some proofs um so I I think that I
I was very interested in ideas and and
not necessarily in the very concrete
aspects of science at that time can I
ask you a question about early schooling
so if I remember correctly you were born
naturally left-handed yes they forced
you to learn correct to write with your
right hand you went to a very strict
schools like like military levels of
strictness almost yes yes uh this it's a
very interesting type of education they
have it in France it's called the Lis in
France and this is a very special school
in Argentina was actually founded in the
1500s by the Jesuits and uh my father
went to that school uh and so he wanted
me to go there and my brother went there
too and in six years of a very strict
education mostly humanistic I learned
Greek and learn Latin I learn immense
amounts of History which I loved um and
there were other courses in French and
so on in French we had to memorize
incredibly long poems that we had to
recite do you still remember some of
them because sometimes early memories
are embedded so
yes yes and my brother and I sometimes
tell each other some of the pieces of
these poems yes I'll just say something
right now uh to foreshadow what will
likely happen several times throughout
today's discussion which is anytime that
my father um is in the presence of his
brother my uncle Carlos um they start
laughing about jokes that they've been
telling over and over back and forth
with one another uh since they were a
young kids so just the mere mention of
his brother will bring a a bit of a
smile and a chuckle to to both of our
our phes yes yes so so I learned a lot
of French and also my parents decided my
mother mostly that I had to learn French
and English and I went to aliance Franz
where for five years I went there I was
essentially the only boy in the class
which was very nice way and uh in order
to graduate essentially you not to be
fluent in French but in the special
school I went to the discipline was very
straight very straight um you know we
were supposed to do things you don't do
in the United States the moment the the
teacher walks in everybody stands up and
if you was late and standing up you just
kicked out of the classroom and things
of that sort uh but it was a lovely uh
experience in many ways when I reflect
on it because it gave me a humanistic
education that has been incredibly
useful in my career most people don't
realize that I mean I tend to think of
things in a very broad context and it's
because of the education I had okay so
and I loved History of Rome and I'd
learned to recite things in Latin uh and
so it was very very I enjoyed that very
very much my brother didn't actually and
so well you two are very different I
great great adoration for for Carlos but
you two are very different along those
lines I was just about to ask um or
mention and some of uh our Argentine and
uh South American listeners generally
and perhaps even European listeners
might be shocked and perhaps
disappointed to learn that you're one of
the few
argentines that I know who doesn't care
much for the game of football soccer it
doesn't seem to concern you much at all
no no the the reasons for that are are
sort of interesting I think I've
reflected on that because my own wife
likes to watch a soccer game I mean
she's stain she likes European uh
tournaments I didn't I never lik mob
Behavior I never liked uh this whole uh
passionate involvement in these things I
know I don't know why I I was never you
know able to understand that to the
point that I never went to a soccer game
till the week before I left for the
United States my brother insisted that I
had to go to a soccer game and uh this
is sort of embarrassing but I at one
point or the other someone you know
there was a good goal and so I stood up
and said this is great and I turn out I
was on the wrong side of the audience
and people got very almost violent with
me you know so I yeah soccer to me is
something that I watch but I I'm not
passionate about right yeah I I never
really felt that I was that interesting
although I you know I was in a rowing
team I uh I learned boxing I did a lot
of sports but I know I don't like that
much of spectator sports like tennis I
played tennis since I was a teenager I'm
not a spectator sport fan either the
other day someone asked me what my
favorite sports team is you'll like this
and I um I said the Harlem Globe
Trotters because they have they're
undefeated they have the best record and
that was actually the one professional
sports team game you took me to when I
was a kid we'd always go see the Globe
Trotters they're undefeated yes
unbelievable yes yes my father took me
to see them too they're fantastic yeah
yeah yeah I love it so your father was
not a scientist your brother is not a
scientist um and you were faded
according to them to join the family
business but then you had a teacher who
exposed you to physics to physics and to
the notion of being authentic in what
you want there were two parts to it he
was a very interesting and tormented man
I felt uh but it was very interesting he
would come into the class most of the
students you know really didn't care
what he was saying and so I was
fascinated not only by what he was
saying but his whole personality but I
need to say something here that is
important uh I also was rather
irresponsible you see I I grew up in a
in a family a well-to-do family that I
never thought how I was going to make a
living so it was easy to be interested
in science or anything because you know
it's it's what you do it's you're you're
you know you're interested in culture
you read books you do things but my
father used to say what are you going to
do once you graduate you don't want to
start teaching in elementary schools or
something that sort my brother used used
to say if he does physics I'll have to
support him because yeah he still says
that so scientists were considered poor
poor yeah yeah they couldn't get a job I
mean science in Argentina Argentina has
a big tradition in medical Sciences I
think two or three Nobel prizes and so
on but in physics they produ some very
good physicist one of them lives in the
United States I mean he's very very
famous malda Sena I haven't met him but
I know he's one of the top people in the
in the field but I I just got into this
because I was interested it sound
sounded you know fascinating and
abstract and the ideas were so powerful
and I think and uh you know I reflected
a lot on this when you're are
psychologically in adolescent because my
parents made me jump two grades so I was
much younger than my classmates and that
created a lot of problems for me I mean
know at the time when you know you were
developing and so all the boys were
talking about girls and so on I still
was really interest understanding why
the excitement and so on you know I was
very young but um it gave me a sense of
order you know reading a book about
physics and understanding that there are
laws that tell you how things work gave
me a tremendous sense of order and power
so you know everything else was a little
bit in flow and the family and my own
relationships with friends and
girlfriends or whatever and going back
to science it was just a sense of and I
still remember those days it was very
very um soothing in a way so it's like a
touchstone yes yes yes and I and what
grade were you exp this teacher was was
a like middle school high school yeah no
yeah High School yeah I was uh 13 or 14
years old yeah yeah when I finally I
started listening to this and I said wow
this is impressive um you know it's
powerful uh there is there are ways to
know what's true and what's not true you
know there you know you just don't
speculate on things um so but most of
this stuff I didn't really understand uh
then I had this cousin of mine Hector
who was already gone but I would go to
his parents' house and there there were
his books all these incredible books on
quantum mechanics relativity and I would
just take them home and I didn't really
comprehend a lot of the math but somehow
it seemed impressive it was like looking
into a mechanism or something uh so and
I used to take them to school and one of
my teachers once said you know you seem
to interested in this but you don't
understand this so you need to you need
to learn it and he was the one who
started pushing into this um on the
other hand my family was saying you
should become a lawyer just you know my
brother and father and that interested
you no I it's interesting because now
I'm very interested in aspects of
constitutional law and so on when I hear
about arguments against you know the
Supreme Court and so on I became very
interested in law and economics later on
I mean just to read about it but when my
father was talking about at the dining
room table was all about strategies of
you know getting uh something done half
an hour before the opposition so you win
a case I mean I was totally interested
in that I'm sensing a bit of a theme
which is that um social Dynamics and
what other people do regardless of
whether or not they like it or it earns
them a particular living um didn't
capture you like that the idea that
people and their uh groups and their
their ways of thinking and behaving
while that they may not bother you it
doesn't it didn't Captivate you the way
that like it sounds like physics you
know made you think that there's
something kind of bigger that there's
something um more Universal which indeed
physics is right it's not it is a it
explains most everything yes and I most
everything yes and I also think that I
was a bit of a loner um it was very hard
to find people that you know children I
mean children or young people that
thought Like Me So eventually I became
part of a group we were four or five
guys that used to get together on
Saturdays and you know go to the movies
and so on and then afterwards discuss
you know whatever we were interested in
and so I was I was only 16 years old you
know and deciding what to do with my
life of all four of us we committed they
were some of them came from incredibly
wealthy families two of them we
committed to really be true to ourselves
and pursue what we liked but I was the
only one the other two ended up running
the business of their parents and one of
them essentially I don't know what he
did I I saw him years later money
becomes a a pretty a bright Beacon for a
lot of people yes yes yes yeah I'm
grateful to you that you never pushed me
to go in any particular direction right
you pushed me to not go in particular
direction
but never with respect to academic
choices in fact I don't recall you
telling me or laara that by the way
folks that's my sister's name um that we
had to do anything except attend our
classes and do our best but I never felt
pushed to go into science no no although
you you had a little bit of a curiosity
about it animals animals and I remember
I was going through a period in which I
started getting convinced that there was
very little to do in physics and I
wanted to change and one day on a bike
ride I think I was carrying in the back
of my bicycle you were young you asked
me what what is the unsolved problem and
I said I don't think it's in physics but
it's the brain and you said okay I'll go
into that you said I'll never forget
that well it's interesting um I'm
fascinated by human memory as you know I
know you are as well and I recall that
story as well I recall it slightly
differently but we're really closely
aligned which is I remember you used to
walk me to school in the morning um and
you would drop me off at the cut through
to the path behind uh gun High School uh
because that's I would pick up Kristen
Harnett across the street and you told
me it would be better if I picked her up
by myself and walked her to the end of
the street which is uh where class was
you were teaching me chivalry um and I
remember asking you what you do I was
probably five or six years well let's
see first grade so it' probably be
somewhere around six or seven years old
I asked you what you do and you said
physics and I and I said well what is
that and you said well um let me tell
you the feeling it gives me instead you
said you know the night before your
birthday and I said yeah and he said you
know that feeling and I said yeah and
you said well that's how I feel every
day when I go to work yeah and I
remember I'll never forget that and I
said what do you do and you said I'm a
physicist and I and I said well then
I'll be a physicist and then I recall so
maybe we had the conversation twice um
you saying well most of the big problem
s in physics are solved so you should
pick something perhaps a little less uh
unread like uh and I said like what and
you said well the brain is pretty
interesting and then I said okay I'll
work on that yeah no that's true uh this
issue of feeling like before your
birthday is something I remember saying
to you I don't recall feeling that way
every day I do recall feeling like this
when I had an idea and finally worked
out and we wrote a paper and so on you
know it was an incredibly exciting time
is you know well you know about it
you've done it yourself now and uh and
so I I wanted to convey that to you it
was very very interesting and important
to me that you understood that um on the
other hand it made me feel very isolated
as well not only with you with everybody
I mean it's a it's a very esoteric field
you know you you used to walk into the
study look at me you know writing
equations and so and would you say
what's that you know I was thinking
about your study which was just a door
down from my childhood bedroom I still
remember the way that your study smelled
I can still smell it I have an
incredible sense of memory for certain
things I can still remember but I
remember how your books were aligned
where your stereo was placed your photos
your photo of Einstein uh your photos of
me and Lura and Mom I remember I
remember all of it um and the sofa that
was just off uh behind it because you're
a napt taker like uh which I inherited
from you um but I remember that yeah you
would spend a lot of time in that office
and listening to classical music do do
you listen to music while you work or
did you list all the time all the time
yeah I classical music for me is a is
something I discovered very young very
young uh my parents also loved classical
music my brother too and is something
that I I to me has a tremendous
emotional resonance with the way I I
feel sometimes it's background music
sometimes i' really listen very
carefully um it's something that I yes
I've always had in my life and still
have it I mean it's very very important
to me but not many musicians in our
family no unfortunately yeah although
there is a famous one we've all tried
we've all tried yeah yeah you in
particular yeah yeah we all failed yeah
yeah yeah there is a very famous
huberman the great violinist bronislav
huberman I mean there's a picture I
think I sent it to you hean Einstein he
um he was one of the greatest violinist
in the 1920s 30s and 40s an incredibly
interesting man he's the founder of the
Israel philarmonic and that's one of the
reasons that the name huberman is in
some Street in in Israel that because of
him but are we related to him
unfortunately
not which explains the lack of musical
prowess in our in our family we all love
music but none of us are are good
musicians right yes except uh my cousin
Diego Diego was he has a perfect ear so
he can really do interesting things yes
yeah so so going back to your uh
childhood this teacher yes right so I
mean what was it you already had sort of
seeded an interest in in finding order
um mean things that made the world make
sense um what was the political
situation in Argentina at that time
quite horrible parts of it I mean there
was a dictatorship that lasted for a
long time this Pon thing and so on it
was a he was really a a follower of
musolini and people of that sort in
World War I so what did that mean like
out in the streets like you grew up in
the heart of buen aidus but like what
did that mean in terms of I mean was
there poverty everywhere were people I
mean I mean was there violence I mean
what does it spell out to well it was a
very it was a oppressive regime I mean
you had to be careful what you talked
about you know in my my family like most
of the that in that social class we had
maids and a cook and so you have to be
very careful what you said uh because
they would run that information back
absolutely and people and and your
grandfather my father at one there was
prevented from coming to visit me in the
United States because he was classified
as a communist because he did not join
the ponist party okay for the record we
are not Communists we are both big big
Believers in capitalist
sitting here at this table so no and so
it was terrible it was a terrible time
was a very oppressive time but he wasn't
a communist no of course not of course
no no he was on the other side but the
idea at that time it was to be
classified as such eventually that
information leaked to the obviously to
the American authorities so when he
asked for a Visa they they Den denied
him it was a very complicated story I
don't think we should waste time to know
how it got eventually resolved through a
friend of mine who was a priest and a
Jesuit here in the United States but the
the point being that during that time it
was a very you have to be very careful
the way you spoke the way you said
things there was a dictatorship that was
very much like the fascist in Italy you
know and actually that dictatorship
lasted until a few years ago because as
you know as you heard the new president
we have is one that actually ran against
this whole ideology peronism and so on
mele Mele yes so I was never I was not
political at all but you have to be
careful uh but it was a funny a funny
time and when he was overthrown through
a military Revolution you know my
parents were you know delighted and we I
remember the celebrations and so on but
that was considered the minority that
was against him you know it was it was a
social class movement the working class
was behind Bon and what he promised and
what he gave them uh so that but that
that eventually died so the the real
problem was that there was no real
commitment to science as a as an
investment that the country should make
yes it was nice to have Nobel prizes and
it's culturally good but they didn't
have the pragmatic Notions that we have
see in the United States of doing
science means solving concrete problems
and uh this was in the 1950s and 60s too
right so this was the like one of the
biggest and fastest progressions of
physics and its implementation in the US
yes so were you hearing about that of
course I was following it all and I
wanted to uh you know I wanted to buy
books about it and so on I uh I had some
conflicts with my father about spending
money on books that he thought that were
not going to take me anywhere and so on
I mean he was a very pragmatic lawyer he
didn't understand why I was doing these
things uh so yes I was aware of
everything and uh and actually the
University was very good I entered the
university you had to choose what you
wanted to do and after a tremendous
crisis personal crisis I decided not to
go into law or engineering which was the
alternative my father offered and
decided to study Physics and um I didn't
regret it at all uh it was very it was a
very impressive time you know I got a
good education in physics little bit too
abstract so this was experimental
physics or theoretical physics both both
both I I in the lab I was okay I mean I
I I was better in in in classes on
Advanced I took a lot of courses in
advanced mathematics and calculus and
beyond that and you know complex
analysis and so on it was it was so it
turns out you were good at math after
all good but yes I understand math I'm
not I'm not a whiz I mean like many of
my students have been I have guys that
can do incredible things you know that I
I can do them but slowly okay I
understand yes yes so but yeah physics
yeah is something that I I I I knew how
to be intuitive about it I had already
interesting ideas that perhaps didn't
plan out but yeah so the teacher in high
school yeah were they the one that told
you that there was a like a career in
this yes he said you know you should
devote yourself to this if you really
care about it he was a man that
obviously he he was sort of tormented on
many levels and so on you say that
because of the way he carried himself
physically yes yes yeah yeah he walked
he was troubled and but was interesting
intense man I still he remember his name
was in he was a philosopher his name in
easland which is a German name and he
started talking about you know
discovering you know Christianity and
what he meant to him and what it is to
be authentic and so on so and then I had
a very large exposure to the great
thinkers of the Antiquity you know Roman
and and Greek so it was all to me
fascinating interesting um you know and
it was good to have friends that I could
discuss these things with do you think
it's a disservice that nowadays in the
United States um and even when I was
growing up but especially now um that we
don't force kids to be exposed to all
these topics like we try and um track
people into something early on actually
uh recent guest told me that um many uh
schools are now just giving knowledge
but not expecting um kids to do problem
sets um you know teaching them about
physical activity but not expecting them
to do physical activity seriously well
that that sounds a little bit funny yeah
well no but that's I mean that is the
direction that education in this country
is gone I was a visiting professor in
France actually you you live there
because of that uh in Paris and I
discovered you know the French
intellectual tradition is also very very
abstract compared to the American I mean
the English and the Americans are the
ones that took physics and and the
Russians too into a very very practical
realm and made progress that are very
very concrete almost engineer in light
I'd like to take a quick break and
acknowledge our sponsor ag1 ag1 is a
vitamin mineral probiotic drink that
also includes prebiotics and adaptogens
ag1 is designed to cover all of your
foundational nutritional needs and it
tastes great now I've been drinking ag1
since 2012 and I started doing that at
time when my budget for supplements was
really Limited in fact I only had enough
money back then to purchase one
supplement and I'm so glad that I made
that supplement ag1 the reason for that
is even though I strive to eat most of
my foods from Whole Foods and minimally
processed foods it's very difficult for
me to get enough fruits vegetables
vitamins and minerals micronutrients and
adaptogens from food alone and I need to
do that in order to ensure that I have
enough energy throughout the day I sleep
well at night and keep my immune system
strong but when I take ag1 daily I find
that all aspects of my health my
physical health my mental health and my
performance both cognitive and physical
are better I know that because I've had
lapses when I didn't take ag1 and I
certainly felt the difference I also
notice and this makes perfect sense
given the relationship between the gut
microbiome and the brain that when I
regularly take ag1 which for me means a
serving in the morning or midm morning
and again later in the afternoon or
evening that I have more mental Clarity
and more mental energy if you'd like to
try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com
uberman to claim a special offer right
now they're giving away five free travel
packs and a year supply of vitamin D3 K2
again that's drink a1.com huberman to
claim that special offer when I came to
the United States I must tell you uh I
went to uh I came as a graduate student
the university of's let's talk about
that so how did you end up getting into
the United States as a graduate student
you applied yeah I I was graduating and
you know the the future looked rather
gloomy I I had a girlf friend whose
father was very wealthy and she said no
problem you're going to work for my dad
and you know he got a factory or
whatever why do I feel like that is not
the kind of offer that you'll go for no
no not at all not at all I've never
known you to work for anyone except you
yeah in a way you're right I'm a bit the
same yeah yeah so yes yes I I I just the
idea of you know running a business was
not I was I was truly idealistic and
irresponsible too but I had a cousin who
was already you know got his PhD in
theoretical physics at Columbia
University was a professor in France
then Sweden and so on so I I felt that
perhaps I should go to the United States
and so I started applying to this my
father was saying you know I won't even
help you with this he didn't like my
parents didn't like it uh you know I was
very close to my family in many ways and
um so I I applied to many places I
remember being accepted at at um I think
it was Cornel and I said oh New York
that's great till someone said to me you
have to take a plane to go to real New
York and New York city yor so in anyway
I got it I got it this very very nice
Fellowship to go to University of
Pennsylvania which is who the fellowship
from uh the Navy the United States Navy
yeah this I'm very grateful for that um
and I actually wrote that in my the PHD
thesis you know I was very grateful and
I think it was incredible that they were
supporting that kind of research they
wanted to bring you to the US to build
weapons no no no not at all not at all I
came to United States working for a
professor burin who just died at the age
of 100 101 and uh no but I was supported
by the United States Navy it was a
fellowship by the University of
Pennsylvania um but I remember uh then
my first interview with some of the
teachers P professors there I am talking
to them about the foundations of quantum
mechanics and the guy says to me let me
give an interesting problem you have a
ping pong ball but instead of being a
classical ping pong ball it's a Quantum
one could you tell me at what Heights
will it bounce I had no idea what to do
I had no sense that you could turn all
this knowledge into something implement
mble practical and so on so it was quite
a struggle the first year so you had
theoretical understandings not
experimental understanding right yes or
empirical and so on I didn't know how to
calculate things very well yeah I didn't
think being good at math I was good yeah
math understanding the math there's a
difference thing between understanding
implemented and you know creating well
you learned that I I had four years of
graduate school and got my PhD in
physics so obviously I learned how to do
it but what I'm saying is that I had
this very very vague theoretical
understanding what the world worked but
not really a practical you know I didn't
have it at my fingertips that's what you
learn when you go to graduate school as
you know yourself okay so yeah it's one
thing to learn about the brain as an
undergraduate but in graduate school is
where I learned how to slice brains
stain brains Trace connections record
from neurons and it's a whole other
business to get your hands dirty in the
thing absolutely absolutely the same
thing for me yeah I taking courses and
discovering what you like and dislike um
I was a little bit bound to my Professor
because he was the one who gave me the
fellowship but I didn't like what he did
which was always very problematic did
you have a good relationship it was
funny he he sort of became his tried to
become my surrogate father but on the
other hand intellectually I always felt
that the guy was not quite there uh I
mean he was he was very famous song but
he's a member of the National Academy he
was not but he was very famous very
famous uh but I always felt that there
was a lack of dep into what we were
doing it was not just him it was just a
solate physics um there was a very
famous uh you know Merill man who had
tall contempt for Sol State physics he
used to call it squal State physics for
those who don't know Mary Gil man we'll
get to uh Murray later uh because I had
the interesting experience of meeting
him as a child but he um he discovered
the cork he won the Nobel Prize in many
ways is considered at least at least as
um uh superb pH physicist as Fineman
maybe better yeah yeah lesser known but
among physicist you know would evoke
great fear in everybody we'll get to
Murray in a little bit so did you enjoy
graduate school yes but it was
incredibly hard very hard the first year
in to and and also personally I was very
lonely um you know I say I was
transplanted into a whole different
world Philadelphia is not a city I would
recommend to many people to live in uh I
escaped every weekend to New York and my
professor was always upset about that
and you went from being pretty well off
financially to basically having no money
I had no money I I lived on very little
money as a matter of fact yes uh my
parents uh my father felt that okay this
is what you're going to do you're going
to survive on this they paid for a
ticket once a year to go back to visit
and it was incredibly nice and soothing
to be back to be taken care of and
everything else you know the life in the
family and then going back again to
Philadelphia and the reality of just
being a student unlike many people that
and foreign students that were in in
with me and other places I did not enjoy
I mean it was was quite a cultural
adventure for me to meet people from all
over the world to learn what they I
became very close to a Japanese post
talk a very interesting man but I was I
was quite miserable and so this was in
the
mid-60s yes yes late 60s yes yeah I did
not like my life there at all I mean
it's a I I lived for 4 years I didn't
have a single girlfriend or anything I
you know I dated and so on but I I I
just felt that I was transplanted into
an environment that I didn't like okay
okay and that that's and on top of that
my my conflict with my advisor were not
serious because they were not overt but
they were there all the time that can be
tough for those listening you the
relationship to your graduate advisor is
um a potentially wonderful and
potentially hazardous one because they
they exert enormous control over your
future not just through letters of
recommendation but opportunities and um
I got lucky in that sense you were very
lucky yes my my advice was the kind of
person that if you went out to dinner
with him he ordered for you told you I'm
not kidding he was that kind of guy he
would take the whole group to a Chinese
restaurant and before you said I don't
like this he just ordered once he took
me for a whole weekend to his summer
house to finish a paper the I couldn't
finish a paper and it was was a mess and
he and his daughter was there uh she was
uh 16 or 17 and she said are you too
going to talk physics I was going to say
no let's go for a work he said that's
all we're going to do but the physics
consisted in him regurgitating whatever
we were doing I mean I remember I was so
miserable looking at my watch seeing how
the heck do I get out of here I didn't
have a car so I was sort of his prisoner
for from Friday to Sunday night um so it
was it was it was hard for me uh I never
really felt that happy on the other hand
I had no other options at that time okay
so uh but then as soon as I graduated I
I got out so I was just thinking about
how different your graduate school
experience was from mine I uh you know I
delighted in my adviser as you know she
fantastic people yeah I got lucky and I
I got a lot of that from you which was
to um for those who don't know I I left
a program at Berkeley which everyone
thought I was insane insane to leave
Berkeley to go to Davis that was by
choice but I remember what you said you
said uh how big is your incoming class
in Davis right because by all standard
criteria Berkeley is the better
institution Davis is great but
Berkeley's considered exceptionally
strong and I said there three of us and
you said well either you're making the
best decision of your life or the worst
mistake of your life and then I I think
you asked me what was driving the
decision I said well there's this person
there her name is Barbara Chapman and
she just seems to be working on things
that if I don't work on these problems
I'm going to regret it and I can't
imagine working on anything else and he
said I'm go for it which I really
appreciate because um any any parent if
I were a parent and my kid said I'm
going to leave Berkeley go to Davis
halfway through a PhD and start again I
think uh I probably would have bulked so
well Barbara also played a very very
nice supportive emotional uh role in
your life I mean it was obvious that she
had tremendous preference for you yeah
she would like her son in many ways I
smile and uh well up a little bit only
because well she passed away young but
um she's just an amazing person so I
feel very blessed for that um that
wasn't your experience um with your
advisor so during that time uh I did
want to ask about this I asked about it
being the the mid to late 60s because um
it was the counterculture movement yes
right and um one thing that people
should know about you I'll just offer
this up is that in the entire time I've
known you which is a while now
um you've been very clear like you never
had any interest in recreational drugs
no never did them no even though that
was super common then I've never seen
you have more than a glass of wine yes
you never been drunk in your life never
and you don't like football despite
being from Argentina it's I it occurred
to me on the drive over like like peer
pressure is just not something that
impacts you you're not going to do
something because people around you are
doing it well no you're absolutely right
I I always felt this sense of uh
uniqueness or whatever and but I became
very humble because of it I'm not
arrogant it's not that I feel that
others other us are worse and so on but
yes when I came to the United States
there was something think there was a
decision I had to make which is I
remember explicitly thinking about was
the first time that I was beyond the
control of my parents and family and the
so social environment in which I was in
Argentina so you could do whatever you
wanted and I was not the only one who
came there were three or four brilliant
uh mathematicians and physicist that
came with me and I saw them within a
year just losing it all they never one
of them never graduated they got into
drugs they got they moved to the Village
in New York and they they decided that
that was the life they wanted to have
problem is that you know 10 years on you
know what are you doing right I mean you
know being a getting to be an old hip is
not that interesting um so I I really
had that notion at that time that I
needed to be very disciplined and I had
to internalize a set of values and to
ask myself what I want and what I don't
want and so yes indeed I used to go to
parties to me was quite a surprise uh uh
you know in New York Philadelphia you
know people smoking pot and all sorts of
other this incredible things getting
drunk and so on
uh it was something that I you know I
would say no thank you and that was it
and I felt quite okay with it uh and
they and I never felt the need to
satisfy a group of people that were like
this in order to be included you know
there's only one person that I've ever
met in my entire life now that I'm 49 I
can say things like now that I'm 49 who
has never been drunk never done drugs um
basically has never really had a sip of
alcohol except for once and that's Rick
rubben my good friend who's like me Yeah
by all standards is you know probably
the greatest music producer of all time
across you know dozen a dozen different
genres right not just rock and roll but
classical country all this and I once
asked Rick um you know you you worked in
music where you know drugs and alcohol
are are everywhere or at least used to
be and he just said yeah it it never
really interested me I could be around
it but not participate yeah and and so
the two of you are the only people I
know that have ever had that um kind of
relationship to what's going on around
you where you don't feel pulled into it
I also didn't understand I mean for
instance the the the the role of drugs
and alcohol in young people I was a
graduate student to a large extent plays
a role of relaxation and and you know
getting rid of stress and anxiety and so
on to me it was very interesting that
people would actually come sometimes to
my place and ask you know do you have
something to smoke or why because I'm
nervous or whatever well you know deal
with your state of anxiety but don't you
don't have to drink in order to do that
and I was always a little bit also
concerned about my brain I mean I was
afraid that these things would just take
me over the edge and of the Rails so I
just but I think I was also I need to
say this I was also rather judgmental of
people who did it at that time and it
was a way by being judgmental by saying
this is wrong then I was able to stay on
my on my track okay today I'm much more
understanding I mean I hear people and
if that's what you know works for them
is fine although I still don't like it
um and it was even worse when we came to
California because that here everything
was going on not just drugs and
everything else so uh well let's talk
about that but not that specifically
right off the bat so you finished your
PhD yeah you could have become done a
postto become a professor I was playing
with that I was playing with that I I
wanted to go to um my my dream was to go
to Cambridge uh university in England
not only because the the the cabinh
laboratory was fantastic there was the
whole thing on DNA I mean Crick was
there and so on so I thought that
perhaps I would just start uh you know
inhaling some of those Vapors you wanted
to get into biology well I was
interested I mean because I read the
famous book by Watson you know the
double helix and I I couldn't sleep I
mean I read it one night and say it's
incredible what this guy amazing book
amazing book yes so I said oh the whole
thing is becoming like physics it's no
longer all these complicated names and
so on oh it's crystallography which is
you know I mean physics and chemistry
are so soy is boring because you have
it's like both you have to learn all
these crystals I'm just chuckling
because the the uh the spaghetti model
folks or as we call them the
crystallographers are probably covering
their eyes right now but um that's all
right they they they love what they do
and thank goodness for them of course
because they design novel drug pockets
and receptors I mean they're doing some
cool stuff so I thought that being in
Cambridge was okay I mean you would
suffer from you know not even Heating in
the rooms and so on but then what
happens was I mean you know I I Met Your
Mother uh and then you know she she
brought a little bit of reality into my
life and said you know well she said you
know it's time for you to graduate time
because I was just staying there as a
you know PhD student you know it was
fine you know okay the money was a
problem but you know I got to live like
this you met mom in New York I Met Your
Mother in New York yes and she she was
she was she had her you know feet on the
ground and said you know it's time for
you to graduate and so on and then she
actually was right and so I decided to
look for a job and my my professor
wasn't necessarily letting me go he
wanted me to stay as a postto with him
which you know this is something people
don't often understand is that if a
student or postto is very good the
advisers are deinen diviz to move them
along to their job right but it's a
tricky game because you want the support
of your adviser but often times your
adviser if you're very good they want to
keep you yes so so there was also
another aspect at that time by then I
started thinking that I wanted to live a
much more comfortable life I mean you I
come from a family that lived a very
comfortable life and I wanted that very
badly and so I started you know looking
for jobs and so on my adviser was not
too Keen to um you know tell me what to
do so instead of going I I could have
gone for a postto to a couple of places
but I wanted to be a little more
independent and I discovered that there
were research institutions like IBM and
and Xerox in the west coast and so on
there were you know people could do
science you know good science and you
know B Labs was the most famous one of
all that was in the east Coast in the
east coast I went to baps for an
interview and I felt that they were
running that like a Russian interment
Camp I mean it was unbelievable you were
they were we were 10 of us and you know
they they took us around and people were
taking notes of what you were saying and
asking and so on telling us that was an
elite place it was an elite place so
East Coast yeah yeah the East Coast
institutions I mean it makes sense to me
now why having been raised in the Bay
Area um that East Coast institutions and
I are just never going to mix because
there's the they love tradition they
love hierarchy and they love history
whereas the West Coast well it's all
about the startup the IPO what is about
what happened in the last three years
and what's going to happen in the next
10 years right well on the other hand
there is something nice to be said about
the European model of universities in
the sense the biggest contrast you say
this I remember uh I you know when you
gave when professors came collum and so
on they were wearing sud and thae at the
University of Pennsylvan and IV League
school and so on I came to Stanford I
went to the first colloquium and the
students were coming in shortes with
their dogs into the auditorium I
couldn't believe it I mean it was it was
such an incredible you know change
cultural change you smart smart I mean
oh incredibly smart incredibly smart
they know that about that so in any
event I I discovered something which
historically became incredibly important
although I I was marginally involved in
it which was Xerox Corporation had
invented a copier decided that they were
going to get into the information age
and they decided to establish a new
Research Center in paloalto next to
Stanford where they would recruit people
that would work on this whole thing
computers and information and physics
and so on and I came in and the guys you
know whoever interview me they said well
this is exactly the place for you so
that's what I did and the interesting
thing was that while I was there doing
what I thought was interesting things
there was a whole group of people very
small that invented a personal computer
Steve Jobs saw it and built the first
Mac out of was I had a classmate in high
school Becca canara yes um I remember
cuz she wrote a Vasa a school yeah her
mother was involved in and her mom was
involved in in creating the uh it was
Adele Adele yes Adel Goldberg goldber in
developing the um the ability to move um
what appear to be pages on the screen
objectoriented languages I had no idea
that was going on I'll be honest with
you I mean it was going on the second
floor they were all hippie like I mean
it was it was a scandal of the life that
they had there it the' 70s and still the
Bay Area is not was not what it's now I
mean everybody went to radis uh you know
those take long lunches and there was a
lot of stuff on drugs and so on yeah can
I ask a question about that so Xerox
Park is was this incredible place I
remember going there when I was a kid to
to your lab actually one of my earliest
Recollections was you took me into your
and Jim Boyce's um uh experimental lab
yeah you um you told me to pick a piece
of fruit there was a bowl of fruit I
picked a banana
you took out the banana you peeled it
and you dipped it into liquid nitrogen
and then you told me to throw it on the
ground and we shattered the banana and I
thought that was like the coolest thing
ever I remember that so that was
happening but the um you mentioned the
stuff that was happening about
developing computer
interfaces and um that Indeed jobs
borrowed or stole um mostly because Park
didn't protect the intellectual property
well I mean he didn't do it illegally I
mean he saw it they basically gave it
away they basically gave it away right
was thinking that you know cop were the
future and that's it but I also recall
cuz I overheard the conversations
between you and Mom when I was a kid
perhaps um that there were it was pretty
wild at Park like there was this whole
like the room with the bean bags people
were taking LSD and Other Drugs that
wasn't your scene though no no no not at
all I was in the physics lab and we can
talk later a little bit about it J Boyce
was a very very interesting collaborator
of mine and so on we had a lot of fun
but not not on that level as a matter of
fact we were considered very Square
people uh you know doing what we were
doing I mean this is a group of people
that were truly the I mean books have
been written on on this whole class of
people that became really the embryo of
what Silicon Valley became uh there were
brilliant people trying to do new things
Adel Alan K there were many of them did
you ever want to get involved in that
stuff I used to see them as as so yeah
I'll tell you how I got involved the
head of the group Bob Taylor a very
charismatic man who was responsible for
the development of the personal
computing he was the head of the
computer science lab he once heard that
I played pingpong so he started
challenging me to ping pong so we used
to play ping pong you know and the
conversations were so odd because I
would say oh you do computer science I
have some mathematical problems I would
like some guys in your lab to help me he
said we are not we are not the kind of
computer scientist you imagine like at
IBM with a white coat fixing machines
and solving M we want to revolutionize
the world we want to change the way you
think he used to say that to me and I
sort of understood a little bit of it
but quite frankly it seemed totally out
of whatever I was doing this is what
when Mark Andre um founder Netscape Etc
um a16z now when he was sitting in the
very seat you're sitting in um here he
described as this notion of wild ducks
yeah that at companies you have these
people that are you know small groups of
people that are really kind of wild and
outrageous and really testing the outer
limits of what's possible do you think
they serve an an important tremendous
tremendous and I was a little bit of
that in my field
at that time I was the first one to
realize you know that once I saw these
machines I could use them for doing
things even in physics I no one could do
uh and the kinds of fields that I chose
to work on were totally out of what
people were doing at at Xerox or IBM and
so on I think that these people are
essential uh now the question is what
does a company or a university what do
they do with those ideas and so on zero
lost it completely I mean they showed
them the stuff and there a whole books
I've been written about it well one
thing that I think I'm realizing now I
inherited from you um consciously or
unconsciously is that uh well I'm I've
been more of a risk taker with uh
various aspects of my life than I
probably should have been but um that
I've always enjoyed being
near um people who are really pushing
the boundary on something like my love
of like skateboarding but not just
skateboarding but our friend Danny Way
jumping the Great Wall of China building
mega ramps in his
I knew I wasn't going to do that but
there's something about being adjacent
to people like that yes that changes the
way that you that I've approached things
that um were more um pedestrian to make
them less pedestrian yes you know and
and maybe we'll return to this because
uh um you know I think that being around
people who are real Mavericks and real
iconic class can be very beneficial but
it doesn't mean that you have to jump in
and do what they're doing right well I I
I decided I one take huge risks and as a
matter of fact my first piece of work
after I got my job at at zero Park which
was supposed to work on some solid state
physics or whatever was I had this
notion this fantasy of Einstein in the
patent office so I would start working
on things that uh you know were crazy uh
there was a there's a whole notion in
physics which is you know called tachon
particles that are fast in the speed of
light how do you say it tachon takos
they said from the word takos which
means fast Swift means particles that
are faster than the speed of light which
is imposs but some physic were playing
with that idea okay and I became very
interested in that as a matter of fact
my first paper out of uh graduate school
was on taion and I had the pride of
getting the paper accepted in the top
physics journal his physics review
letters physics letters yes yeah and I
remember my cousin Hector sending me a
note or something saying well now you I
now I see the road to predition he said
but I was so proud of it I I really
thought that I was doing something
incredible and it had nothing to do with
the work I was doing on a daily basis
and I published several papers on things
that I were very important to me you
have a lot of single author papers yes
this is something that um like is is
especially rare in biology but you have
a lot of single author papers yeah yeah
I I I was very proud of that yes yes I'd
like to take a quick break and thank one
of our sponsors element element is an
electrolyte drink that has everything
you need and nothing you don't that
means the electrolytes sodium magnesium
and potassium in the correct ratios but
no sugar we should all know that proper
hydration is critical for optimal brain
and body function in fact even a slight
degree of dehydration can diminish your
cognitive and physical performance to a
considerable degree it's also important
that you're not just hydrated but that
you get adequate amounts of electrolytes
in the right ratios drinking a packet of
element dissolved in water makes it very
easy to ensure that you're getting
adequate amounts of hydration and
electrolytes to make sure that I'm
getting proper amount of both I dissolve
one packet of element in about 16 to 32
ounces of water when I wake up in the
morning and I drink that basically first
thing in the morning I'll also drink a
packet of element dissolved in water
during any kind of physical exercise
that I'm doing especially on hot days
when I'm sweating a lot and losing water
and electrolytes there are a bunch of
different great tasting flavors of
element I like the watermelon I like the
raspberry I like the Citrus basically I
like all of them if you'd like to try
element you can go to drink element.com
huberman to claim an element sample pack
with a purchase of any element drink mix
again that's drink element spelled l MNT
so it's drink element.com huberman to
claim a free sample pack today's episode
is also brought To Us by expressvpn
expressvpn is a virtual private Network
that keeps your data secure and private
it does that by routing your internet
activity through their servers and
encrypting it so that no one can see or
sell your data now I'm familiar with the
effects of not securing my data well
enough several years ago I had one of my
bank accounts hacked and it was a
terrible amount of work to have that
reversed and for the account to be
secured when that happened I talked to
my friends in the tech community and
what they told me was that even though
you think your internet connection may
be secure often times it's not
especially if you're using Wi-Fi
networks such as those on planes in
hotels at coffee shops and other public
places surprisingly even at home your
data might not be as secure as you think
to make sure that what I described
before would never happened to me again
I started using expressvpn the great
thing about expressvpn is that I don't
even know notice that it's running since
the connection it provides is so fast I
have it on my computer and on my phone
and I keep it on whenever I'm connected
to the internet with expressvpn I know
everything is secure my web browsing all
my passwords all my data and of course
anything that's behind an account wall
like a bank account it can't be tracked
and no one can access or steal your data
which is terrific if you'd like to start
protecting your internet activity using
expressvpn you can go to expressvpn.com
huberman and you can get an extra 3
months free again that's x p s vpn.com
huberman to get an extra 3 months free
can I can I ask you a question as a as a
slight departure but it's something I've
always wanted to ask you um and feel
free to say no if it's not um like
something that could be done in in a
couple of minutes um so many people hear
Einstein's name they think of the hair
they think of
Relativity um is it possible to explain
relativity in a way that the the
everyday person can get it a little bit
better than they they perhaps understand
it now yes I I think as a matter of fact
I learned not uh not long ago that
Einstein himself wrote a popular book on
relativity that seems to be very very
accessible okay now there are two
aspects to relativity I mean there are
there are two two things that our brains
were not made by Evolution to understand
intuitively one is relativity and the
other one is quantum
physics we know we have intuitions like
you know and animal for instance if you
see a a lion running after a zebra and
so on the lion can actually calculate
intuitively you know the speed and at
which he can move and so on we can do
the same but if you start thinking about
what happens when you get to near the
speed of light we have no intuition
whatsoever time almost stops there are
all sorts of complicated things length
contract I mean it's a very complicated
set of things and that's why it's very
hard to understand although the math
works then there is General reactivity
that is even worse because there is some
kind of a war ing of SpaceTime that is
responsible for gravitation but I'll go
into that in a second the other one is
quantum physics our brains are not not
only are they not wired to understand
that near the speed of light because no
one moves near the speed of light I mean
we we move as speeds that are fairly
fairly small compared to the speed of
light and quantum mechanics is at such a
microscopic level that is below
basically the level of a molecues
molecules atoms and inside the atom so
it's very very hard to visualize or even
understand some of the very
counterintuitive ideas like entanglement
and also you know so relativity can be
understood in the sense that you can
explain certain things but people say
well how can how can it work like that
and then you have to get into the math
okay but I think that I I took a course
a few years ago on generativity and I I
I just for fun yeah yeah I I wanted to
learn it finally it's profound deep and
it it makes you feel that this this man
uh Einstein he had help from a lot of
people but still it's an incredible
thing I mean you know it it's it's on a
level of Boven Symphonies and and mo
piano conceras I mean there something
that comes into your head and you're
able to do you know through a lot of
struggle I mean it took me year took him
years to do that okay so but it it's
profound and now the qu when you say can
you explain I mean the the point is
Einstein one day discovered that if the
speed of light is speed of light no
matter how fast you move respect to beam
of light is still moving at the speed of
light that means that the notion of
simultaneity between two events is
relative now so you and I might say yes
now is 110 but if you are moving very
fast with respect to me instead of 110
you'll say something else okay just
because time for you and I are not
synchronized and that leads to also of
very interesting effects and practical
effects too because from there comes the
idea that mass and energy are the same
from there nuclear weapons came out of
that all sort of very interesting things
you know and uh today you know we can
even detect uh gravitational waves that
are coming from the almost the beginning
of the universe we can detect that
because of those theories they can
calculate so it it's profound yes I mean
Einstein I think stands on on I mean
Newton too by the way I mean you know
Newton Einstein I think they're top
people you know but they they talk to
God in a way as they
say we'll get back to God uh a little
bit later um
yeah it seems to me that
um even though it's very hard to
grasp it's worth asking uh for those of
us that that don't have an intuitive
sense of of Relativity theory that is
starting to you know peer into these
things a little bit trying to understand
them do you think that it gives um one's
mind an ability to um you know to tap
into like forms of of cognition that we
don't normally think about when when
we're looking at macromechanics of of
the world around us that objects fall
down not up and you know a helium
balloon goes up okay and you can learn
something about helium but but it it's
all um it's all pretty straightforward
with with just a few simple bullet
points uh whereas when you get into
quantum mechanics it it um yeah it
challenges the mind in a way that really
feels like for most people there's a
cliff and we just kind of go okay you
know and obviously um there's trust
there but um for people that are curious
about understanding how the the really
tiny bits of the physical Universe link
up with their really big bits of the
physical Universe um where's the best
place to start well okay you're asking a
very very interesting question which is
for most of us who are training physics
we learn how to calculate we learn how
to operate with these things I you know
I just got a patent on using Quantum
Mechanics for communication and so on
but it it's still the puzzle is why does
it work the way it works so what I'm
saying is you learn an operational way
of doing these things operationally I
don't know what happened in your brain
because I have ideas that come out of
intuitions not just formulas and
equations and yet I don't necessarily
think I understand deeply why these
things are the way they are they are
where they are and there's no reason why
they shouldn't be like that our brains
as I said before you know they are
essentially um conformed to understand
the macroscopic world not high speeds
and so on so physicist to work in
generativity I don't can do incredible
calculations can you tell you what black
hole collapsing into another hole black
hole would do and you know they're using
gener activity things and so they they
can do it now what it does to your brain
that allows you to operationally work
with these equations and solve it and
have new
ideas it's something I don't understand
namely I I for instance the example that
I give about quantum mechanics that's a
very simple one because I talk to a lot
of people nowadays that work on this is
I can give you two dice okay you know
just dice you can go to Mars and I stay
here the dice are let's assume they are
quantum mechanically entangled I throw
my dice I see three you got three and we
don't communicate they're entangled they
go this is faster than the speed of
light I throw again five you get five I
do one you get one I it's an amazing
thing what is the origin of the
entanglement is is a property of quantum
systems that they can get entangled
that's the word and somehow what happens
to your system affects mind but doesn't
affect it in the sense a signal no
signal they're entangled now let me
living now this becomes rather they're
not entangled through other bits of the
universe they're totally independent
totally independent yes they are
entangled in the sense that Quantum
mechanically they started like this now
there are ways I mean there are trivial
thing there's a famous example of the
socks okay so you take a trip and you
you you you took a pair of socks let's
assume that blue socks and so on and
then you open your bag and you oh I I
forgot one sock so this is my blue sock
so you know that there is a blue sock at
home so knowing that is a correlation
but that's trivial right I mean you can
do that with anything in quantum
mechanics imagine that you look at a
sock but the sock is changing colors all
the time so now I observe it is red the
other one is red I observe it is green
the other one is green okay randomly so
little bits of the universe are
entangled well some people and I a
friend of mine who's a Buddhist claims
that there is a whole religious or
Buddhist voice saying that everything
was entangled yes originally all atoms
all electrons all elementary particles
were entangled yes because the universe
start very very tiny and everything was
entangled okay so you could imagine that
the universe is entangled so what
happens here affects out but it gets the
the entanglement gets lost when
perturbations and noise appears and so
on so we are not today entangled with I
don't know I mean we don't think that we
some people think that people are
entangled yes yes well it gets to it but
that's a whole yeah that's a whole thing
that's a that's poetry that's poetry
exactly
um there's another example that brings
us to a a a very Salient aspect of my
childhood which is uh Chaos Theory okay
right so um I'll say it so you don't
have to you're one of the the uh
founders of chaos or certain aspects of
Chaos Theory we'll talk about that but
you know um for those of us that grew up
in the 80s and 90s I was born in 75 um
you know who saw the movie Jurassic Park
you know there there's a a moment in
that movie where I think Jeff Goldblum
is explaining you know uh what is it
chaos theory and maybe it was the
butterfly flapping its wings in one
location and impacting something
someplace else for the The Poets in the
world right um that was a very um
captivating example because I think the
human brain can naturally understand
that you know things around us we can
have an impact on them and they can have
an impact on us but that um the the
notion that a a small insect you know
thousands of kilometers away can impact
something that's going on um more
adjacent to us it it seems outrageous
sci-fi but you know the the notion that
one thing impacts another impacts
another that's pretty straightforward
right there's just a domino a dominoe of
the physical world chaos theory is
different yes okay could you
explain chaos yes and I'll just add one
more thing just for context for you to
you know the sort of the paints in the
pallet um around the same time I
remember the book chaos coming out and
and um where
there was a lot of excitement around
chaos and this was coming up um uh there
was also a lot of discussion about
fractals the idea that when you zoom
into things at a very very small level
you start seeing some regularities now
we know this about Crystal structures
right like you put a drop of water under
a high powered microscope you see
structure there it's not random the
angles are are very consistent at least
around certain nodes Etc so I think
people love this idea that we have
repeating um you know repeating patterns
and numbers nature that things at a
distance can impact us more closely like
this is the kind of stuff that not the
non-physics brain can understand and it
does enchant right we sort of poked at
poetry I love poetry you love poetry
um
but I think it enchants because I think
humans are naturally interested in how
you know the randomness of life might
not be as random as it appears so um
what is chaos
okay where does it exist in our lives um
not emotional chaos but um and what is
the relationship between fractal in
chaos if any okay let me say first of
all about why chaos is what it is and
it's not Quantum and there is quantum
stories on there is a Quantum chaotic
Thing feel but I won't go into that
chaos is a very interesting idea which
is it flies against our
intuitions since the times of Newton we
know that if you give me the position
and the velocity of initial particle I
can use Newton's equations of motion to
tell you where that particle is going to
be anywhere M with an incredible
Precision when we launch a rocket we
want to go to the Moon we can calculate
and predict exactly where the rocket is
going to be after so many hours after so
many days and so on actually we use the
equations of motion to predict that
trajectory and it's a precise trajectory
this is how Elon was able to capture the
rocket with the Chopsticks recently I
something of that sort yeah that's
that's yeah okay now the a of chaos is
so that that's okay it works there are
some cases where let's assume I'm going
to give you a simple example so I I take
a bow I put it on a on a billar a bilar
bow on a on a billar table I send it out
and at the moment I can C know exactly
the position of velocity I can tell you
exactly where it's going to go k says
that a tiny tiny tiny tiny difference in
the initial position or velocity of that
ball will take it very very far from the
other one which is ridiculous I mean if
I tell you that you know two cars start
at exactly the same speed you the same
position and one of them has a little
more you know I you know they'll stay
parallel to each other in some systems
and I'll tell you in a second that
actually those two trajectories diverge
completely so is what we call
sensitivity to initial conditions okay
that's what chaos is all about In
classical mechanics what is really weird
about it is that it happens in systems
that also undergo friction because let
let me give you an example that I used
to you know I used to teach k at
Stanford for many years so imagine I
give you a a a be full of a molasses and
you take a very big ball stainless steel
ball and you you just throw it into the
thing well after a while it will just
drift with a thing is called Stow slow
because it you know friction slows it
down and it just goes and now you throw
another one from another altitude and
they all of them are going to do exactly
the same some systems that are chaotic
do exactly the opposite even though
there is friction everything tends just
slow it down they just keep going far
apart from each other amazing amazing
thing so that's chaos okay and I can
tell you a little bit why I got so
involved in this and they work with did
does chaos exist in every physical
system mostly yes yes maybe even in
neurons or the brain oh yes absolutely I
mean this is why I don't want to get
into a controversy here about issues of
uh when not we live a deterministic
lives or not but you know if things are
a little bit random and so or even just
a tiny difference in initial conditions
can take you to very different comes in
but this we're not talking about many
particles we're talking two okay so
that's one now fractals is a different
story that comes out of a guy who I knew
very well Beno Mandel bro a very very
very funny character brilliant too but
very strange um who discovered that
certain things are so similar that if
you look at the coast of Britain he used
to say that you look at the coast of
Britain and you said okay tell me how
long is the coast of Britain you go with
a meter and you measure it now to that
the meter that you're using now can
measure up to an inch well you're going
to get a different distance even though
you adding the same because there are
all these little things in the coast of
Britain that are essentially s similar
that add a tremendous amount of length
that's what a fractal is all about these
are structures that are not just a
simple line but they have all these
other things okay he thought that it was
a whole new geometry as a matter of fact
and I tell you this because I knew benma
very well I met him through a talk that
I gave on chaos he used to hang out with
chaos physicist he was a mathematician
brilliant man in many ways I was having
dinner with him in Copenhagen in a
restaurant when then the the very pretty
waitress came to us and so on and served
us and you know we were talking he
French man he spoke with a very heavy
French acccident so she she says
something what are you doing here he
says we at the conference but I'm not
just as a conference I'm a very special
man he said to her and she said how come
and he says do you know who uid was and
she says sort of she said well he was a
Greek man who invented geometry and she
said oh well guess what I am better than
ukl I invented a different geometry he
said that yeah he said that points to
the waitress in Denmark that knew about
uclid that was very the Danes are smart
yeah yeah okay that was very funny that
he was he would talk about it so he
would give a talk and he would say my
equations can generate anything indeed
he could generate any any any patterns
so he would say you want a mountain here
it goes a mountain you see a mountain
beautiful grafts and so on so
self-similarity is a very powerful idea
uh in in physics because it allows you
that if you know something at a certain
scale You can predict what it's going to
be at a different other scales and I use
that but chaos and and and U and
fractals are not always the same as he
used to say because he didn't like
physicist because we never liked his
talks we said okay so you're telling us
that you know things are he used to say
I'm not interested in Pulley I'm not
interested in things that move things up
and down he used to say you're thinking
about elementary physics class something
of that sort yeah yeah so but uh fra are
very interesting because these are
self-similar structures at all levels
they look the same you look at big you
look at small they have the same type of
you know geometric behave chaos is all
about Dynamics how things evolve in time
okay and the chaotic systems they tend
to diverge from each other for a long
long time the man who invented the idea
of the butterfly effect was a man called
Ed lawen who was a very famous
meteorologist at MIT and he was solving
the equations of the atmosphere trying
to predict the behavior of the weather
and he noticed in these very old
computers and so on that sometimes he
would get different behaviors he thought
there was something wrong about the
computer and he discovered that the only
thing that was wrong was that the
initial conditions that he was giving
them was very very tiny different and he
would get different things from there he
went into that and there's a very Bea I
mean there are ideas that are very
beautiful like strange attractors and so
on I mean we don't have to go into that
but so chaos is really a field that
essentially explains why things that
seem to be simply you know explained by
classical physics tend to diverge from
each other and they give rise to random
outcomes that's the important thing you
can use chaos in order to Generate
random numbers you can use gen chaos to
Generate random patterns I've done that
it's very chaos exists at the quantum
level and the macro level okay so I was
working at some and I don't think it's
interesting how I got into this because
it was I was doing something else and
suddenly I decided I was going to do
this and I really started going very
fast at this but then I had a very
bright student you you met T hog and we
decided let's see if we can see chaos in
quantum mechanics and we started doing
it and there were a couple of papers by
the Russians actually showing that in
this was a case and we discovered that
it was not the case we actually proved
that Quantum systems are not chaotic
there's some kind of interference
between them and so on that makes them
recur back and forth periodically why do
I find that reassuring that if you get
down to a small enough level that you
can really predict what's going to
happen as opposed to small perturbations
leading to Big differences in outcome
yeah that that was the whole point we we
discover that quantum mechanics there
are waves and interferences and so on
that make the system recur you know as a
matter of fact I had quite an exchange
with big fan about it you know when I
met him which I was I went to give a
talk at Caltech and I was in his office
and he said so what are you work what
are you going to talk about because I
don't want to waste my time and I said
about chaos he said okay I said you know
something things that are very in
particular in quantum mechanics so um uh
I'm smiling because he was so so sharp
and so on uh so he said okay give me the
problem I he said what is it I said well
okay I give you an electron and you have
any potential and I give you a laser he
says the laser inside or outside the
apparatus just like that so I said
outside so you turn on the laser I said
so what happens to the electron and I
knew he was going to give me the answer
that was already in the literature but
he appeared to me was thinking he stood
up and walked around and was making lot
s of noises and then sudden he says the
energy grows linearly in time I said no
it doesn't how do you know I said we
measure it I can show you and so on and
you know he was very impressed because
that means that there is no chaos
actually then he said oh you know why I
got it wrong I said no because I wasn't
thinking in colors only black and
white was he trying to be funny of
course he was always funny let's talk
about Fineman and Gilman and Mand
brought and all the rest in um as a
collection for a moment um you know one
of the great
um uh Gifts of my of my life has been
that you you would talk about scientists
it really enchants me I'm I'm like I'm
get so delighted when I hear it like I
grew up hearing the stories about these
scientists right and um not athletes
right um which is great like uh but
scientists and it it seems to me that
every time you talk about another
scientist you you both um rever the the
work they did you see something unique
about them and something I learned very
early on and I've certainly internalized
is and forgive me because I'm I'm
assuming here is
that there's a certain aspect of like
their quirkiness or something about them
like to take them seriously but not too
seriously like I never learned um to
assume that because somebody was uh
Nobel Prize winner that they were
perfect for instance like you would tell
me you know like uh Einstein had you
know he was amazing like the his
relativity the patent office all this
stuff and he had he like had all these
problems with women oh yes or you know
and I read the books right um or you
know or this person I won't name names
because these people are still alive
Silicon Valley you know like actually
when you and I used to take walks when I
was a post do we used to see jobs
walking around right no feet no shoes he
had feet no shoes and you would say you
know I mean like he's amazing like this
guy's brilliant but then we would
chuckle about some of the the job isms
you know and so one thing that I learned
was that scientists are just people that
these uh these Founders they're creators
they're just people and they often have
um very challenging areas of their life
as well like like they're not perfect
they're not Gods yes some of them have
almost um Godlike access to the universe
and understanding it but it seems to me
that like you hold people up for their
contributions but you never actually are
thank goodness are put people on a
pedestal to the point where you're like
this person is spectacular in every way
and I'm not saying you cut them down to
size but I learned very and this has
served me well in my life and now public
facing or on Twitter like if I make a
mistake and someone comes at me it's
somebody that I respect I go H but then
I remember like this person has a lot of
issues in certain domains of their life
so you know to realize that you know
like we're all human like this notion of
like like none of us none of us are Gods
right and yet there are people like
feineman like Gilman like Einstein who
have almost Supernatural levels of of
ability yes yeah so what's that about
like how how do you hold um knowledge
insight and stature in your mind
alongside like the the humanness the
like the the inherent flawed nature of
all of us you know well um okay it's
it's it's complicated uh there there are
many ways to think about it um in some
of these names um you know for instance
these people are built into Giants by
the the media too I mean you know fan I
mean if you go to coure and so on
everybody's asking you know what did fan
do what how what was he wearing and so
on as if you know he was a God I mean
obviously what he did in physics he and
I interrupt myself here because he
really worked very hard very hard
according to El man in particular to
creating a myth about himself he worked
very hard when I met him I I I can even
tell you the anecdotes I only met him
for an hour but he was he was obviously
the kind of man that wanted to leave an
impression with you R-rated and x-rated
anecdotes exactly and and you know but I
remember the good one was that you know
I was going to give the collum and he
said uh should I come I said I think you
should come and and then he said well
then I'm going to give you a piece of
advice do not look at me because if you
look at me during your your talk you're
going to get confused and so on you know
and actually that's exactly what
happened I I started you know the collum
at Caltech you know the the Marine Board
Camp of Science and there I am starting
to talk and sudden I said and in instead
of saying the next hour I said something
like in the next week or something as so
because I there he was and then he
started saying you know like look
elsewhere else you know that kind of guy
you know for anyone who hasn't lectured
there's a tendency sometimes when one is
going fast to fill in without thinking
it's just something that one learns I
mean I've had to learn it the hard way
when it we we missed in the recording
and this kind of thing it's a it's a
humbling moment but yeah I think that um
well Fineman would have been cancelled
by by the standards of the last few
years I took even my wants to lecture he
was given in in San Francisco uh and uh
he was giving a beautiful lecture to I
don't know get some award for teaching
and so on and suddenly a bunch of women
walked into the front of the the the big
room you know and they started com
because it turns out that in one of his
lectures he said something like you know
if you do it this way you're as bad as a
woman's driver as a you know said finean
said that and then all these women were
saying things and then he said I love
women they're all smart he was very
clever so he would have lost his job by
the standards of yeah yeah okay but
regardless of that because I really want
to go back to this issue people like
Mary galman I mean it was to me he was
in most intimidating person I've ever
met I mean I mean now eventually I got
to know him because he liked what I was
doing and as a matter of fact he and I
organized a workshop an incredibly
luxurious place in France uh the estate
of Madame schamber one of the oil people
actually was an incredible meeting that
he and I organized so I got to know him
a little bit personally and all he was
complaining at that time is couldn't get
a date he was a widow and he wanted to
uh you know women were intimidated by
him too well he as I recall cuz I
remember meeting him when I was a kid
and we both shared the love of birds but
he was perhaps one of the world's most
obnoxious people I mean he but you
impressed him as a matter of fact I I
still you know I I don't know if you
want me to remind you of this uh because
we had two stories there uh your mother
and I were taking a hike in Aspen and we
saw a bird that looked incredibly
complicated and so on so we looked at
the bird the next day we went to him
because he loved birds as you know and I
I said I saw a most unusual bird he said
describe it so I and he gave me the name
in Latin of the bird and then he said
that's the most common bird in the Bay
area of California as a matter of fact
you should see it when you pick up the
newspaper next time you're there and
indeed two weeks later I went to pick up
the New York Times and there was the
bird but at the same time I said Andrew
likes birds and he asked you what is
your favorite bird and you said the
rainbow lower keit still is and he said
this kid knows this kid knows he said
I'll never know my birds I know my bird
that it's amazing I never heard you know
I because if you could have said a
parrot he would have not been very
interested okay so but he was
intimidating very intimidating and he
was nasty too when he wanted to be so he
enjoyed the power he had I was on the I
was the member of the board of the
directors of the Aspen Center so we had
to decide what programs we had every
summer and he would come to me and say
whom do you want me to insult today wow
he had all sorts of very funny names for
all sorts of physicist and so on the the
downside of people like that in science
cuz I've known some too there there's a
very famous
neuroscientist um now in his 70s who has
a Nobel Prize who also is um known for
generating anecdotes about himself like
um and in recent years because of
political correctness wokeism and so
forth is tends to do that less because
it sort of a trucker's mouth um
brilliant guy um but is kind of known
for being outrageous and trying to
create tales about themselves this is
something that scientists do yeah right
right right to in order to maintain
their legacy yeah also to feel good
about themselves I mean by the way I
mean Gman I mean I work with him he was
incredible I mean you know and the way
he would interrupt people and so on and
there are two things I can tell you that
are interesting once he was announcing
some new results he was working on on on
this whole thing on uh on on quarks and
other things and uh and actually was
extrem Theory and he announced the
seminar and everybody goes into the
garden you know you know the seminars
are nice I need to remind the the
audience perhaps here that the Aspen
Center for music was right next to in
the tent they were rehearsing so the
seminar was supposed to start at 3 and
there Gil man comes with all his notes
under his house he always had notes
walking pacing and nothing happened and
suddenly they were rehearsing the uh
bto's 1520 which just T and then you
heard the sound and then he started I
will now tell you about a new theory of
how the universe works that's the way he
spoke so what strikes me is that these
people take themselves very seriously
absolutely absolutely do you think
that's important in life I I I don't I
like to I mean as you know I like to be
to have a good sense of hum about myself
and be self-deprecating I think some
people you know have issues and they
they do that I mean it's all depends on
how how do you you know see things I'd
like to take a quick break and
acknowledge one of our sponsors matina
matina makes loose leaf and ready to
drink yerbamate now I've often discussed
yeram mate's benefits such as regulating
blood sugar its high antioxidant content
the ways it can improve digestion and
its possible neuroprotective effects
it's for all those reasons that
yerbamate is my preferred source of
caffeine I also drink yerbamate because
I simply love the taste and while there
are a lot of different choices out there
of yerbamate drinks my personal favorite
far and away is matina it's made of the
highest quality ingredients which gives
it a really rich but also a really clean
taste so none of that tanic aftertaste
in fact given how amazing matina tastes
and their commitment to Quality I
decided to become a part owner in the
company earlier this year in particular
I love the taste of maa's canned zero
sugar cold brew year bmate which I
personally help develop I drink at least
three cans of those a day now I also
love their loose leaf matina which I
drink every morning from the gourd so I
add hot water and sip on that thing and
I'll have some cold brw throughout the
morning and early afternoon I find it
gives me terrific energy all day long
and I'm able to fall asleep perfectly
well at night no problems if you'd like
to try matina you can go to drink
maa.com huberman right now matina is
offering a free one pound bag of loose
leaf yerbamate tea and free shipping
with the purchase of two cases of their
cold brew yerbamate again that's drink
maa.com huberman to get a free bag of
yate loose leaf tea and free
shipping let me ask you about the um
about this so you know further down my
list of things I wanted to talk to you
about is that you know you you've always
loved it it's clear from a young age
like high level Concepts deep Concepts
order in the universe working on hard
problems you just filed another patent
like you've I mean as long as I've known
you you've you've been pursuing some new
area of knowledge or implementation of
knowledge and and yet you like your
father you um I know you Delight in
everyday things I mean since I was a kid
you've taken a walk after dinner you've
biked to work if you can you know that
day because of the weather you you love
like a really good espresso a really
good meal like the the high and the low
are checked off boxes for you yes right
that's different I think than the way
most people think about scientists
especially
theoreticians um theorists excuse me um
which one is it theoreticians or
theorists theorist they say yeah
theorists um that you know we assume
like the the academics that are always
somewhere else like they're up here
they're grounded they're not feet on the
ground but you like everyday things
you're very much like like where we're
going to eat dinner tonight is every bit
as important as this AB the conversation
about relativity absolutely I think that
there is a myth that it sometimes gets
perpetuated at universities my first
meeting with my advisor when I got to
University of Pennsylvania he said I
want you to want to know one thing
you're going to live like a monk I said
what does that mean no fun nothing
you're gonna work I want you to work
you're getting paid to do something I
was sort of scared and then I told him
that on weekends I had to escape to New
York City to take a walk on Central Park
and look at nice things and you know I
always enjoyed the good things of life
and you know at that time I couldn't
afford them but that doesn't mean that I
didn't you know enjoy them and I do
believe that I I inherit this from my
father a tremendous enjoyment on of life
in general and um uh yes I am very
physical and tactile about things I I
like to surround myself with things that
are beautiful I I I enjoyed as you said
good meals and the daily things of our
life I I'm not just living in some
Stratosphere and not being able to you
know um enjoy a meal I'm having and so
on no the opposite and uh yes in that
sense I am very much like that and uh
you know uh Mar's the same way and so
that's why we enjoy that I your wife
yeah my wife sorry uh yes uh we we
really enjoy you know she in particular
being Danish you know they have this
idea of slow eating and enjoying the
good things of life and I I'm very much
like that yes very much I I don't feel
guilty about it uh I you know if I can
afford should you should well there
there is a certain aesthetic component
to to science and the idea that they
sell you that you know Einstein didn't
care about anything actually if you look
at the negotiations that Einstein had
with the institute for advanced studies
for salaries you'll see that he he
really car a lot about these things too
Al so our notion of him is just kind of
like it was just science and he had no
interest in material things is false
right yes I I had an uncle actually
Hector's father he you know there was a
branch of the family that was very much
into culture they had beautiful
collections of paintings and so on and
once I was what 14 or so and he I
remember at a party we had big social
parties in my parents house and he was
lecturing me that I should never care
about anything but truth and Concepts
and so on I was I was a little bit
scared I I I wanted to enjoy life as
well okay so it was a little bit
complicated no no I enjoy everything of
course I I I think I got out of my
father mostly yes uh my mother was a
little more aesthetic in a way um but
yes I I did the tiny little things of
Life are what makes one's life you know
I'm slowly starting to get that yes yes
I think I've been a little uh over like
rabid about my interests almost to an
obsessive level to the point where I've
sometimes um overlooked like how many uh
opportunities for just like lovely daily
interactions I have I try but I feel
like I've just been chasing in the
carrot of of of knowledge like I love
doing what I do I've always done that
you know but well but you have to be
careful indeed I I you know as you know
I meditate and for many years and so on
I'm being in the present and being able
to just you know be there and uh nothing
else is is the tremendous source of uh
satisfaction and calms calms me down and
so on and I when did you start that well
I started actually out of out of um the
discovery I mean a trivial thing that
many people have um I discover that
every time my blood pressure was taken
by the doctor it was just going through
the
roof U you know it's to called the white
coat phenomenon or something of that
sort and I got very very upset about it
because I tried to control it and it got
worse and worse and worse and they told
me you know what to do and so I want one
or the other I have a friend a a
colleague more than a friend who's a
who's a Buddhist who started telling me
about you know have you tried first of
all U bio feedback that's going I tried
for a year I did BYO feedback and then
he started telling me about about
meditation so one day actually I he's a
physicist as well he was visiting me in
my lab and I said he said let me let's
do it I did a session with him in
meditation I I I couldn't believe it my
hands suddenly were warm and you know
felt incredibly nice so I decided that I
really wanted to learn how to do it and
I started doing it at a time when I
truly needed it because I realized that
without being aware I was anxious uh
like for instance I would see myself
walking down the street holding my you
know fists this way that that's not a
very relaxed way of living okay so I I
really started doing this meditation on
a fairly continuous basis and I really
enjoy it uh and it's very important as
you know as as as a father I I say this
to anyone too that you have to enjoy
life I mean the pursuing these things
you know eventually what what you know
the the the value is in the pursuit not
in achieving them anyhow so you might as
well pursue many things at the same time
I mean a good meal properly can be very
very nice too you know I love that about
you um something I'm working on uh I
remember when I along those lines I
remember when I was in graduate school
we we publish a paper and then we
publish a second paper in science and I
remember thinking like this is like such
a proud moment first author paper in the
journal science and I I told you and you
said um you said um well enjoy it and
just be aware that by tomorrow you'll be
worried that you'll never do it again
exactly yeah and fortunately we publish
in nature and a few other journals a
bunch of times after that but you also
warned me about the
postpartum of post excitement like
something great happens you know at that
time we as a field of Neuroscience
didn't really understand dopamine
Dynamics but now we do what you were
describing is this trough and dopamine
that we get a day or two after some big
event yes typically postpartum
associated with the birth of a child but
it could be you know getting a degree or
a great party
paper in science or nature for sth or
paper and and you said a couple days
from now you're going to feel low yes
and you just have to wait and I'll never
forget what you said you said just go
back to what inspired the first project
pick a different problem it'll happen
again yes and the second time it
happened I was like he was right it
happened again and again and again and I
haven't had an infinite number of those
papers in those journals but I learned
about the dopamine Dynamics associated
with pursuing a goal and then you get
the thing and you're very excited and
then you feel the drop yes yes and that
I think that is something that even
ancient philosophers knew about it the
Buddha many you know the Greeks and so
on this idea that the the things we
pursue they are Emeral in a way in the
way the the feelings are they elicit in
us you know and I I think that you're
right and there is also another tendency
one has to uh try to avoid which is
you're are successful in something and
you continue doing exactly the same
thing because you know by now you know
how to do it with your hands tight yes
and I always felt that I want to go
elsewhere and uh you know I I have sort
of a reputation for changing Fields uh
and you know I don't do that in order to
for others to to be puzzled by it it's
just that I'm curious and I want to have
a feeling again that that like falling
in love you know the new thing you know
is nice at the beginning but eventually
whatever you're doing it becomes you
know TR and so on yeah let's talk about
that because um after chaos which
brought a lot of you know I remember we
had reporters in our house and there was
like a like TV and the book by Jim Glick
and then and then you switched to
something completely different yes and
you got into computer science yeah well
computer science is computers computers
what happened was that a lot of the
success that we had was because I was at
Park we had phenomenal computer
facilities there things that we could
visualize at a time very few people
could do and so and one of them actually
someone suggested I get a pattern there
is a pattern for the chaos that
sometimes people have in t-shirts that
actually we discovered for the first
time with guys from UC Santa Cruz with
Jim C crvi and so on um you know he he
was actually very instrumental in
getting me into chaos and so that but
when I what happened was okay so we did
this we did Quantum and then one day I
said okay so what do I do now okay well
you can go and publish one paper after
there in chaos I mean you can produce 10
phds with this but then I said why don't
I do the opposite are using computers to
help me the physics why don't I use the
physics to study computers well that's
an interesting idea but you know I mean
this so how you do that so what happened
to me I was at a meeting on chaos in
Copenhagen and I couldn't sleep one
night and I had a book called the
computer of brain by John F noyman
perhaps someone that was a true genius I
don't know if you heard of him he
invented computers he was a a phenomenon
at all levels and he was part of the the
Manhattan Project he was perhaps one of
the most brilliant people ever existed
at least that we aware of I mean he was
at the institute for advanced studies
for no
there are all sorts of anecdotes about
him uh he had a photographic memory you
could give him a page of a phone book he
would look at it close it and then he
would recite the phone numbers from
bottom to top totally useless skill yeah
but he was a genius a genius true genius
he invented computers he invented game
theory in economics I mean it useful
skill yeah exactly okay in any EV so he
wrote a very little book called the
computer and the Brain no equations
nothing and one night 4:00 in the
morning I cannot sleep I get down you
know it was summer so the sun was still
s day in copen and I went there to read
it and I said this is what I'm going to
do I don't know anything about brains
but I can imagine you know if the brain
is like a computer I could do something
like that but I also want to apply some
of what I know to these things and the
first thing that occurred to me was to
start looking at the computer network we
had at Park these computers were
communicating with each other as we
nowadays we know it that's the internet
and so on so uh there were many many
aspects of this and I decided that
because I was very influenced by uh one
or two students that were very much into
economics and libertarian ideas and so
on and one of them had taken two courses
in in econ at Caltech so we decided to
start looking at this as a market where
computers essentially buy and sell
programs to execute and their machines
and so on so we started really doing
what we call the Ecology of computation
it was a big effort which married
economics with artificial intelligence
and computer but it became a big thing
and so I I became again it's like
falling in love again it's a new field I
I I thought it was great the discovery
process of falling in love is half the
fun absolutely yeah and I also was able
to I mean there is a lot of formalism in
economics and some of it is really I
mean sort of academic and but there are
some ideas that are very profound to the
extent that some people consider me an
economist sometimes because I think in
terms of utility rewards and risk and
all this stuff and as a matter of fact a
lot of the work I'm doing now on
resource allocation in networks comes
from ideas from economics when you go
into a new field do you um you in order
to um learn about the field is that
mainly through talking to people in the
field reading books both both and and it
doesn't strike me that you have ever
tried to ingratiate yourself into any
field it's not like you're trying to be
a member of the field like you go in it
as a as a um as an observer and a
learner yes I am I I I need to say this
I don't think that many people have said
if I stayed in one field M I would have
done much better in terms of reputation
and so on as a matter of fact I can tell
you an anecdote that is uh you mean like
Awards and stuff yeah like for instance
not long ago I was already doing
computers after chaos and so on a very I
won't name the person but a very good
physicist Professor Berkeley came into
my office Bernard we have an issue here
I said what is it that your name for a
membership in the National Academy of
Science is coming up I said oh that's
nice he said what is a problem you're
not writing papers in physics the
writing papers in computer science and
you know we need a physicist because
otherwise the chemist will get that job
you know they physics don't like welcome
to Academia yeah so I said what you want
me to do he said well can you perhaps
write one or two more papers on this so
we can show I said no I cannot do that I
can't well there's a isn't there a
famous story about um Fineman and being
elected to the National Academy yeah he
refused to yes right he he I think they
told him he was in the National Academy
and then he said well what do I do and
they said well you electing other
members and he said I quit yeah right
well yeah so in any event I never became
a member of the National Academy but you
never sought prizes no I mean I would
have liked to get them why not I mean
you know I'm not uh it's not that I said
they they're meaningless but there was
nothing that I could do about it and I
since I was not as you said I was always
a little bit of a always moving on to
the next thing never staying long enough
going to these meetings where by now you
heard it all you know over and over and
over again so yeah yeah I mean I have to
say that you know like I mean I as you
know I still have my position at
Stanford and
teach involved in a little bit of
research but um you know one of the
great advantages I had is that all my
advisers died or killed themselves so I
was orphaned in science and so there was
never an expectation from my advisers
that I do the next thing because they
were dead um so I thought about that and
um but I remember when I launched the
podcast or started going on podcast I
remember you being a little bit
concerned learned you're like you know
what are your colleagues going to think
and I think at that point the um the way
that science was going and the structure
of Academia relative to what my needs in
life were and just a passion to wanting
to do something new I I put a lot of
thought to the fact that you've changed
Fields many times and I just felt
absolutely compelled to get into science
communication and there was no stopping
that but I I have to thank you a lot of
the reason I was able to take the step
to do the podcast in addition to being
supported by Lex freedman's suggestions
and a lot of help from others um Joe
Rogan and others but is that I was like
well that's what you're supposed to do
when you hit when you hit a when you hit
a point where what you're doing isn't as
compelling you wait for the thing that
draws you forward seems like you were
always drawn forward I always think of
carrot and stick it's not like you
disliked where you were it's that there
was some carrot that you identifi and
you go towards the carrots and also
something very um there they my wife was
actually mentioning I've been in a sense
an orphan I never had mentors it's very
interesting except though the this uh
frankly not terrific graduate adviser he
was not my mentor really I mean you know
he didn't even want me to do the things
that I wanted to do uh so I I never had
someone who was whispering Bernard is
the guy to you should be considering for
this or that I mean I had the fortune to
really get to the top of many of these
fields and interacting with the top
people I mean we talk about F and Gilman
there are many very famous people that I
respect immensely that I met
uh when I was in France you know as you
know I was teaching there I met people
that are brilliant and so on and I felt
treated with tremendous amount of
respect as a colleague and so on but I
never had mentors in that sense and also
as I said I I am a little bit Restless
uh I am very curious about everything
and so you know sometimes I see
something and I say oh there's an
opportunity to do something interesting
I think that the the issue of being
curious is extremely important and it's
interesting because I reflect a lot on
say my father my father was an immensely
curious person but all about details he
never liked abstractions of any kind he
was very proud that he went to the same
school I went and the only course he
flanked was
philosophy because he said it doesn't
make any sense now perhaps he was right
about that you know sometimes you wonder
about what these philosophers talk about
uh a couple of months ago uh in Denmark
we were invited uh my wife and I to a
dinner of Phil with philosophers talking
about artificial intelligence I thought
that these people were they didn't
really know what was going on but
nevertheless um yes I am curious and
sometimes I move on to things and I I
feel that the reward the internal reward
you get from doing something new and
interesting and exciting is much better
than a recognition that someone will
come and say you know whatever I mean
don't mean it's understand me I will not
say no to a recognition and I but it's
not really that I'm I I do this in order
to get that and that's not me at all
yeah I mean the the the whole thing is
sort of brings my thinking back to like
the the early discussions about you know
other students are not interested in
physics you're interested in physics
other people are like smoking a lot of
weed and and partying like no like like
you said you you've not had mentors
that's one area in which you and I have
been very different I've always attached
myself to mentors many of them many of
them I mean well there might be a
psychological reason too yeah yeah that
you need this you know or need it that
one put these parental type figures you
know yeah it might be I wish I had them
don't misunderstand me as a matter of
fact I mean my influence on my students
I produce more than 15 phds is also
strange because none of them stays in
stayed in physics now the department of
stord was not too happy with that it's
not that I told him not to but they all
smelled that you know I I I was doing
something else I mean uh you know from
computers I became very aware of what
was going on very early on with the
internet as you know I started doing all
this stuff on social long before anyone
was doing an economics of attention and
all that stuff and many of the students
the other day I found one of them I met
one L damage who you know I think you
was early at Google no she went to
Facebook and the other day she wrote me
a note I was so lucky that I met you she
was going to do a thesis and I don't
know what solar collecting solar yeah
you've collected some pretty interesting
students they're like a pretty we won't
name names uh other uh than than L but
like some of them are are very
well-known people in the tech industry
now yeah and and I think that um yeah it
seemed like the people that would
gravitate towards you it's interesting
your laboratory is off Camp M so anyone
that decides to be off campus is already
making a choice to like they don't want
to be part of the standard culture they
thought was interesting yeah yeah yeah
so let me I want to get back to this
issue of of like internet and Silicon
Valley I recall it was the
early 90s so it would be like 89 9091
remember I had this this girlfriend
Gretchen remember and her dad was the
editor of Guitar Player magazine and
I'll I'll never forget he told me he
said you know it's it's going to be all
about multimedia remember that no one
talks about multimedia he said your your
television is going to be your computer
is going to be your um stereo is going I
mean he he was he was right right he was
basically everything was going to be
synthesized into common devices and we
now know that that that or not to be
true but at what point did you decide
that things like computers were mainly
going to be a a route to Industry and
not to Academia this is this is really
important I think for people to
understand because
um right now it's kind of happening in
biomedical Sciences but you see this at
Stanford people get degrees in computer
science but not to become computer
science professors sometimes but really
so that they can go into industry so how
do you see nowadays like for people that
are interested in science or technology
do they need to go to graduate school
like is a PhD useful anymore Peter field
says that you shouldn't even get a
bachelor I think that's what you know I
mean I I have great respect for Peter
great respect for Peter there are a lot
of things that are easier to when you're
already a billionaire no no no I know
like like Steve Joe saying you know
passion is everything right I mean
necessary but not sufficient right right
right necessary but not sufficient so I
think that what's happening today I mean
technology we are going through a
technological Revolution there's no
doubt about it we used to learn about
the printing press and now it's the same
thing with computers I still remember
and I you know we uh this is amazing
because you know today is so so obvious
I mean people didn't know much what was
going on I park everything one night we
were having for dinner I remember you
know Emanuel moo who was uh you know
they discovered the orexin hypocretin
relationship that's a cause of narpy
isation he was a friend of ours and his
wife they were home with at our dinner
and I was telling them I was telling
them that you could go to a computer and
go through the Lou Museum in Paris and
they say what are you talking about and
so we finished dinner and we all drove
to park at night and I turn on my
computer and there was a man I still
remember his name something P was it
last name he had gone taking pictures of
every painting at the L and put them on
on online so you could just navigate
through the L today is obvious trivial
at that time they couldn't believe it
yeah there you are in Palo Alto on an
evening going through all the rooms of
the L they just couldn't understand what
was going on what year was this I don't
remember but it
was when the web started coming you know
that was you we get email in college in
the final year of 97 so it must have
been somewhere around like 9495
something of that sort right before
right at the time and Reon made the web
available to everybody basically you
know Netscape you know so in any EV so
it was an amazing thing it was amazing
now all these developments were really
done in companies not necessarily in
Academia okay that that is an
interesting point and I think that today
an immense amount of the advances that
we see in biotechnology in computers in
in everything are essentially done I
would say for profit by companies okay I
I think social networks they started we
started doing social networks at a time
but no one even thought of doing it I
used to say I do social science with the
capital S because sociologist used to
study the behavior of five widows in
some Norway Norwegian Village and write
a paper we could look at 150,000 people
how did they visit this side on that
side and predict how you know we were
able to predict behaviors behaviors you
know so I think that today everybody
knows that that's the case and this you
know the same thing with artificial
intelligence but for a kid in high
school or kids in college or kids in I
mean is it worth getting a graduate
education well it all depends on what
you want to do forget I mean I mean law
medicine you need a Prof I mean those
are you need the professional degree I
mean these are ultimately professional
degrees so you need the training I don't
want a surgeon that didn't go to medical
school okay but the the danger is you
and I remember a very very bright uh guy
I had in my in my team you don't want to
become a bluec color worker see what I'm
saying is The Following being a hacker
or being to deal with software is it was
an incredibly profitable profession now
you have these large language models
that can actually program for you you
you need to write a program you go to J
GTP and he'll write it for you so
suddenly you know if you don't have a
set of talents a way of imagining things
of doing something you become basically
just someone that just hacks for you
know for so many dollars an hour now
it's true that they can give you options
if the company does well you get rich
and so on but I still believe that you
need some some contextual cultural part
to this okay now I personally believe
that Humanities and all sorts of other
things are very important and to
understand where where is your cultural
environment where are you coming from
and where is this Society going is
important but on the other hand as you
said you can just finish high school and
start hacking and you know become very
good at it and doesn't require much more
than that do you think the examples of
like Zak um
Elon um you know and others you know
going from you know essentially
departing standard education to start
companies do you think they've served I
mean certainly not talking about the
companies but do you think those
examples um are good examples for people
to internalize or they just are they
unicorns well I think that they're
unicorns and you have to be very careful
we only talk about the success stories
we don't go and interview the guy that
is uh loading a l escaping truck because
his startup didn't go anywhere okay so
it is a very our tendency to see these
people as Heroes and to try to imitate
them is a very dangerous one I think now
that doesn't mean that you should not be
working on the things you care and and
gamble but these are the guys who played
the lottery and won do you remember
there were many other we social websites
before you know Facebook MH and they all
died and Facebook could have died too I
mean zachar might disagree with me but
you know could have died okay and you
know all these things are like that um
Apple went almost under they brought
Steve Jobs again and the guy put them on
you know into the stratosphere and the
same thing with Elon Musk he's a highte
risk taker and so far every time he
flips the coin he comes the right way
but to say I want to be like him you
have to be very careful and to calculate
the odds okay so when you say this how
many of these kids really make it I mean
it's a very complicated thing so I think
that to have a strong background in
something will help you when suddenly
the field switches from being a program
it and making a lot of money to suddenly
programing you know Diamond doesn't or
becoming a technician basically okay I
mean I had a perfectly thriving career
as a lab scientist with grants and
private funding and a bunch of other
things publishing regularly and uh when
I decid to switch to this were you
worried no because I saw okay I saw it
as a as a very slow departure from what
you were doing and I saw the success
very early on I mean I I realized that
you were essentially satisfying two
things that are very important to you
you like to explain things you're
incredibly good at explaining things
since you were a little kid okay you
were always explaining everything to
people and you you have a talent let's
face it I mean you know I'm not saying
this because I want to flatter you I I
really believe that everybody says so
the success of your podcast is a success
at explaining things in in ways that
people understand they don't have to go
and buy a book on neur Anatomy to
understand what you're saying so I knew
that this was a path now I didn't
realize how incredible the path was and
there was a lot of Randomness in it for
instance you started podcasting at a
time when very few people were
podcasting if you start today the story
would be a very different the timing was
um the pandemic people were home they
were listening a podcast so and this it
brings to something to me that many
times people have asked me about me what
what what makes me do what I do I
believe in the idea of walking on
beaches without f with very few
Footprints when you go into a crowded
field is a mess so many of the times
that I move into something else is when
I realize that there's a mobs in of
scientists working at this and the
chances of doing something interesting
are very very small okay the internet
has a lot the information to go
everywhere a guy in Zambia can actually
read the same things that I read here so
it's very hard to compete against such
crowd and many people are brilliant and
many of them are smart so you started
something very early and you were lucky
that you chose a field that resonates
with the needs of people okay there are
also other people who do podcasting and
go nowhere so I I think that I never
worried I actually was you know elated
to see the the the trajectory of your
podcast and the only thing is you have a
tenar position and that is a nice safety
cushion if everything else were today
you're beyond the reach of justice as I
say so no problem you know you don't
needed in a sense unless you no one's
beyond the reach of justice but yeah I
still maintain my tenure position I
spoke to my chairman in Opthalmology
this morning and I'll teach this spring
or or and it's good for you too to to
Really interact with young people and to
hear what they they care and so but I
never worried in the sense that I I
thought that you you have enough talent
to do well and you chose to do it I mean
I remember during covid at the beginning
you were we were at your sister's house
and you were drawing all these little
diagrams and put my drawing yeah yeah
and that's so I think you put them on
Twitter or something of that sort and it
was the beginning of something much more
interesting and important and so I I
never worried about it I I think that
the all of us the the whole family and
those who know you are sort of impressed
at the explosive success of the story
here you know your podcast uh is amazing
I mean I don't have to tell you well it
reflects a kind of an early compulsion
more than anything of learn and teach
learn and share yeah but I there's also
I need to say something uh the other day
actually we were watching your your
interview with Esther per
and regardless of the fact that I think
it's it's a great interview um both my
wife and I were reflecting on the fact
that it's also an incredible tribute to
the way you conduct an interview okay so
there is a talent there I mean not many
people can take someone and talk for and
make it interesting let's put it that
way so you have that I inherited your
curiosity no but it's more than that
it's it's it's also a way of drawing
people out and so on which is also part
of your practice so I never had any
doubts the are the opposite I mean the
issue is you know obviously you're
taking it to many many places long be
beyond what you started which was
essentially explain to people how
Neuroscience works right yeah we've gone
into a lot of Health domains and other
things and I'm also been blessed with um
an amazing team this is something that I
think uh while we share a lot of things
in in common if I may I mean I've I've
um I've always been kind of a pack
animal you know if it was skateboarding
like draw friends together if it's Birds
I have my bird club with Eddie Chang who
know as you know is chair of
neurosurgery at UCSF it's kind of wild
to think about but um yeah I've I've
I've rarely gone alone like I'm just
struck I mean I mean we've had many
conversations over the years but I'm
just struck at how you've been able to
be you've been a bit of a lone wolf with
these different camps you make friends
you have colleagues you maintain
long-term relationship have groups of
people who collaborate with me I don't
do this alone the opposite right but but
there's um I haven't changed crowds very
often I you know and it seems like
you've had to go into you know economics
and theoretical physics and all these
things and um yeah that's that's a an
interesting um difference and look and
it's daunting and thrilling at the same
time I sometimes when you start giving
talks in a field that you never done
much before and you see this audience
you know uh can be intimidating too uh
you know I even when I started doing
Chaos I I thought I was doing very well
till I gave a talk at Berkeley and there
was a mathematicians I I regard
mathematicians as the top top people in
the world and I was saying something and
guy and I he's a very famous
mathematician he said that's a lie I
said what do you mean he said can you
prove it no because you know physics
don't prove theor he said well then it's
a lie if you cannot prove it's a lie it
was quite a you know a cold shower and
that happens to me on Twitter every now
and again well they'll find something
where I misspoke and they do it and it's
it's super embarrassing you correct
yourself you move on no no and then you
learn things too you have a conversation
with some you never forget those things
this is what I learned like you never
forget the the the errors you made like
on a qualifying exam um most people will
never take a qualifying exam but they
basically ask you questions until you
get something wrong the moment you say I
don't know or you get something wrong
that's a that's an important moment
because it's also the thing that you go
look up and you never forget yeah right
and also the tiny humiliations can be
very good too for you I mean this is
very important I've had plenty of those
I've had plent of those I do too I mean
I think it's a very very important part
of you know growing up and discovering
that you don't understand something but
I always I need to say this I mean in
spite of the fact that you know you
paint me as a as a lone wolf I'm not um
I'm very social and I interact I love
interacting with people and I always
been very lucky that I surround myself
with groups of people including today
that are brilliant and resonate with the
kinds of things I want to do and so it
it's it's very stimulating I'm not the
kind of person that ass in a corner and
does theories and publish by I published
papers on my own that was my uh Romantic
Period where I needed to be Einstein in
the patent office and not that I thought
I was Einstein but it was very important
I was the only author okay I today I
don't mind putting my name whatever and
I don't need it I mean I have hundreds
of papers and lots you know more than
enough patterns and so on so um I like I
like interacting with people it's very
very important to me when I have an idea
I need to tell people about an idea so I
can relate yes yes yes so that that's
very good and I still see some of my old
students and collaborators like you know
Tad and so on and we take walks every
once in a while and discuss things you
know and so I learn a lot from him too
right now you're working as I understand
on Quantum Internet yes this is a
mysterious term to most everybody yes
yes um you alluded to it earlier about
quantum entanglement or about
entanglement yes but my understanding is
that foreign governments
countries and um and our our government
and country are very interested in
Quantum Internet yes that it might
actually be at least as important as AI
maybe more important for security
reasons Etc can you explain Quantum
Internet in a way that I can understand
and the listeners can understand I can
explain I mean I'll tell you the the
original thing quantum mechanics was
essentially finished in 1925 so we are
not Reinventing new physics here okay
there's the physics of the gravitation
and Quantum but that's not really what
we're talking about what happens is the
following the basis of all secure
interactions in the internet on
computers are based on the idea that
there are certain mathematical equations
or functions that are very hard to
resolve so when I send you something
encoded if someone is listening to that
conversation that is encoded and tries
to read it it's very very hard to do
because in order to decode that code
it's some kind of symbols and so on you
need to I don't know months or years of
a computer to do it okay but it can be
done computers get broke computer codes
get broken all the time because the
basis of these codes are mathematical
functions you have a mathematical
function you can create a computer
program that will try to unravel it and
it can be unraveled okay so that's one
thing now here comes quantum mechanics
quantum mechanics provide security that
is not given by mathematics but by the
laws of physics so if you have a way of
interact sending messages from one
computer to the other encrypted using
Quantum
mechanisms they cannot be broken can you
give me an example of a Quant mechanism
for encoding imagine imagine that I'm
sending you messages every every message
is encoded in binary ones and zeros okay
so I'm sending a message which is a
string of ones and zeros that string of
ones and zeros could be hello Andrew or
it could also be something you know that
is secretly encoded into something if if
it's classical encryption which is what
we use today a a computer in principle
can look at those symbols and unravel
them now let me show you how how it
works in computer in in Quantum in
Quantum when I send you a Quantum
message the act of touching it trying to
look at it destroys it that's what
happens in Quantum Not In classical
thing I can look at a strings of ones
and zeros and I look at them and I can
make a copy of it and then I read them I
take them to my lab and I decrypt them
okay if I look at a string of Cubit
Quantum bits moving there are not ones
and zeros they are different things
these are moving Parts they moving Parts
they are usually photons they go on on
you can use fiber optics you can use
like I I know what photons are so
they're little little bouncing energy
yeah yeah little Bunches of light
because Photon if they're going around
there are also you know the photon could
be polarized up or down or whatever but
if it's in a Quantum state which is in
the intermediate between the moment I
look at it the moment I capture it I
Collapse it into one of the other and I
destroy it the interaction with it
changes the measurement destroys it this
is the mystery of quantum mechanics that
the interact the measurement collapses
we call the word we call it the word
collap es into one State or the other
before that it was anything we could be
anything so when I use quantum signals
I'm sending cubits Quantum bits that are
called cubits the the act of observing
the Cubit renders into a classical 10
Zer so then there's no way you cannot
break it so does that mean that the
Practical implementation of this yes
equates to Unbreakable unbreakable code
exactly now which is why of course
everybody other governments I mean what
I've been told is that the that in China
they're working very hard on this oh
absolutely and that here we're working
very hard on we are I'm working too and
you're working very hard on us so but
wait wait but who's there has anyone
gotten there yet okay the problem is the
following in order to decrypt this
remember that I told you that you can
use mathematics okay some of these
functions are incredibly complex it
might take the age of the universe
perhaps to to decode them mathematically
let's not talking about qu but if you
have a quantum computer computer now
we're talking about a quantum computer
it can do it in a couple of hours a
quantum computer could decode any
mathematical function of the ones used
in encryption in hours whereas you would
take the age of the universe for a
monster computer standard computer you
can buy to do it so in theory whoever
gets gets this ability first can read
essentially all all the information
that's being sent around the world not
only that and many people are doing the
Chinese the Koreans and we're doing they
are grabbing everything now that is
encrypted they cannot decrypt it and
they store it because someday they'll be
able to decrypt it but it who knows if
it will still be relevant oh buty maybe
and we don't know what imagine imagine
if you can if you can get remember when
the Korean North Korea uh hacked what
was it Disney one of the and then they
discovered all these emails where people
you know like George Clooney I don't
know who was complaining about this or
that so imagine and we just didn't hear
about that yeah yeah okay so if you grab
all this information
we cannot decrypt it today but if
quantum computers become available and
there are people working on Quantum
Computing they'll be able to decrypt it
in the meantime people are working on
deploying these Quantum networks we're
working on that too not to deploy them
but just to see whether or not is
feasible to do that okay the Chinese are
ahead of almost everybody they have two
satellites already in orbit that are
sending these cubits so they this are
impossible to the Crypt okay wait so
they're sending the Cubit so you can
already communicate in Quantum oh yeah
yeah we communic all the time yeah yeah
I have a lab in Colorado that does that
yeah absolutely over 100 kilometers yeah
but that's not what standard internet is
using no no no no but eventually we will
have a Quantum internet based on all
this because in order to talk to these
quantum computers you have to send
cubits not not just normal bits so this
is a race yeah a race we we are not
really I mean since we are not a yeah
yeah and there are a lot of people uh I
I need to tell you that a lot of people
including this government that claim
that this is not really that relevant or
important but I in your for instance
they're really putting a lot of money
into that why would our government not
think it's important because there is
there is a sociological phenomenon here
cryptography has always been the promise
of the mathematicians because there are
mathematical functions you know like
discrete logarithms and so on they
believe the moment they heard about
quantum computers they said oh we can
solve the problem we can create
algorithms mathematical algorithms that
are going to be even harder to break
they call that post Quantum but there is
they don't know if true the the United
States government is following this
postquantum because they think it's
easier and so on already they published
two of this very very fancy Al two
students with a laptop were able to
decrypt it within a week so obviously
you cannot prove that no one will ever
decrypt these things okay so there is
the cryptographers don't they don't like
physics they don't you know they don't
work as physicist so they say Quantum
key distribution that's the name of this
thing it's esoteric is not important and
so on and also it won't work
well they say it's going to work for
short distances about 10 to 20
kilometers we just published the paper
that got tremendous publicity and an
award and so on as best paper that we
were able to send this stuff over 100
kilometers okay so I mean and the the
the Chinese are sending that from
satellites okay so impossible to decrypt
military Communications based on these
kind of things are impossible to decrypt
so they're very important but there is a
whole group of people that are saying no
post Quantum is is what we want and so
n the National Institute of uh I think
Science and Technology they're really
pushing the postquantum thing in Europe
is the opposite they're really embracing
Quantum I mean I was Denmark for
instance is very far ahead into these
things NATO just gave them in P of money
to to work on Quantum and so on so it it
all depends you know it's a complicated
thing because the the crypto people are
all mathematical people so they they
don't care about Quant is any of this um
going to be useful for trying to
understand I don't know how the brain
works um or is it I mean you know
there's still debate to whether or not
the way that we're thinking about brain
function is even like the right way we
think about neurons Action potentials
and chemicals and but the physicists
whenever they kind of like poke their
noses into this stuff they tend to think
about it a little bit differently or
they start to think about well you know
um State dependence like the brain that
you have at 8:00 a.m. is very different
than the brain you have at 2: a.m. or 4
in the afternoon like maybe everything's
happening differently and maybe some of
this actually gets down to the quantum
level like we can't say this neuron
talks to this neuron and when they talk
in the following way um you get a
certain output like is there relevance
here okay there are two things I want to
say beware of physicist getting into
brains uh in brain work I mean they
always end up it's like the new thing
now Neuroscience you know swung the
doors open was I was into Neuroscience
for I mean I think recently Neuroscience
has done made a good move of including
people from psychology computation even
philosophy eoms and biology B all levels
ofis but the other thing you ask about
Quantum and and the Brain there is Roger
Penrose who just got the Nobel Prize in
physics he's one of the few people who
have very esoteric ideas about the brain
being totally Quantum and he's an
incredibly brilliant man he was the
adviser of Hawking I heard him on Lex's
podcast and um and yeah he does have
interesting ideas about how neurons
might be communicating maybe as as bound
networks as opposed to Independent en no
one no one really follows it and I I
don't I'm not an expert in that but so R
prros is the one that's pushing this
many of the physicist go into brain
science are not very uh clever doing
brain science because uh you know I
heard a story I think was Francis cek or
someone who told I was at a conference
and he was saying this that if phys came
to him and said I I decided to go into
brain science and so he said okay what
have you done and the guy says I measure
the specific heat of the brain what do I
do with it basically well I think it's
good that computationally minded people
have joined Neuroscience because it was
getting too modal too descriptive right
that said um I do think that you know
math is so important but it's often used
to intimidate biologists into thinking
that their ideas either might not be
true or that there's better ideas out
there I will say that when computational
Neuroscience first started it seemed
like the attempts to model the brain
were pretty feeble and actually I'll
just say it they were pretty lame but
now I think with AI and llms oh that's a
whole different story like the Nur the
biologists have had to step back and say
Hey you know the these math physics uh
engineering AI types they they have the
potential to really evolve the field
right right at least that's my stance
yeah I was at conferences where people
say things like the brain is a massively
parallel machine and I say wait wait are
you sure of that that's a meaningless
access yeah so I said if I if I show you
a row row of trees and I said tell me
how many are they do you really take the
whole thing and you said 75 or you have
to go sequentially it's not parallel
it's sequential you know but llms are
pretty interesting right I mean you can
take four or five um large language
models essentially sort of pseudo brains
and have them work on the same problem
it's hard to work with five people in
parallel in a way that's coherent right
you can all talk you can only talk so
much over one another I it's very
interesting that's exactly what we're
doing now years ago with with Jeff
frager we wrote a paper on on the idea
of showing how programs collaborating
with each other could solve problems
very very fast that human or others
cannot do and it is a basis of a lot of
the work we want to do now yes and there
are people who are already thinking of
putting many many of these llms together
and then see whether or not they do
better than a single one or better than
a human so you think AI is going to
improve life for the typical
citizen yes because you can use these
things in order to do things that were
very hard to do before I mean I use them
is amazing I mean I I just we just
published the paper on hallucinations in
llms and so because they hallucinate
every once while they say anything but
yes yeah they are very useful very
useful and they I think that the
companies that use them will make more
money than the companies that produce
them like openi and so on yes yeah it's
very it's a very very important field
but 10 15 years ago whenever I'd bring
up AI you would chuckle and say this
stuff is like well the funny thing is
that the other day uh well I don't want
to name him one of the managers at zerox
Park when I was at Park I started
playing with the idea of using machine
learning to to see what they can do and
the AI people at that time said that's
nonsense we need to think about logic
how does the brain think how do we do
cognitive psychology and so we were just
doing neutal L that's exactly it and the
other day I was meeting with some of
these people and they were saying to me
we we used to laugh at you you know
doing this stuff because we could do
only very little and today is the rage
now the difference between what I was
doing what is being done today is a
scale I mean you know they you I don't
know if you know that they're now using
nuclear power reactors in order to power
the the data centers didn't know that
but it's an immense cost of computing
you have no idea the amount of work that
it takes to one trillion tokens in order
to to get one of these things to work it
strikes me you've always been very
open-minded and very willing to adopt
new technologies but it hasn't changed
your daily life very much like it like
not much at all I remember early on you
said uh you showed me the intern
and you said be very careful and I said
why you said it's like mental chewing
gum you chew and chew those were your
words you said you chew and chew and at
first it tastes good then it doesn't
taste very good at all then you don't
taste it at all and then you realize
there's no nutrition right and I I
always think about that in terms of
phone usage or web foraging Behavior
like um and you still bike to work you
take a walk in the afternoon or or uh
after eating you um you know you've
always been incredibly regular with your
routine despite the evolution of all
these Technologies like you're not the
guy in Silicon Valley who's like tricked
out with all the gear no no no well
there's another actually I've never seen
you at a cafe with a laptop well
sometimes but well there's another
aspect to this as as you know in the
last up to five years ago I spent four
years working on the economics of
attention and why is it that people
attend to things and I really believe
and I'm not an expert that there is a
tremendous resonance between these
machines and our human brains and they
are addictive uh this the former CEO of
uh hulet Packer where I was in direct in
the labs um M Wickman used to say you
know I I wake up in the middle of night
to look at my my phone and I know people
who do that and I there are members of
my family who do that more often that I
would like to see them do that you don't
do that no I I mean I do it but not not
I don't have this compulsion to see
what's going on I had a student that he
said I love spam because at least
something is happening oh my goodness he
he said that he spam spam he said I I
get spam and I I look at it because some
something's happening he used to say
he's not a very successful Financial guy
stop doing St brilliant fellow brilliant
fellow but that's because maybe your
internal world is is Rich enough that
you don't I mean no but I look at news I
like I like to look at things I like
look at videos don't misunderstand me
it's not that I ignore it but um yeah
I'm not I'm not I mean I mean I like the
latest things and so on especially if
they're beautiful and so on but yeah I'm
not into whatever the latest is and so
on and I I remember I got some Oculus
things that I got for free from faceb I
gave them to you and I never used them
once or twice I'm not I mean I've used
VR in my lab but we I I don't want to
spend time in VR and also as my
conversation with one of your
collaborators here revealed uh before
this this podcast I love mechanical
things and the details the analog world
okay so yeah digital is interesting and
you it's fascinating some ways but I
like things you know like mechanical
watches cameras that click when they
press them and so but not artificially
okay so I I I really like that I like
things that are very classical and so on
in many ways and I enjoy that I I like
technology don't misunderstand me and I
use it a lot um and I am you know I I
use it and I I do new things with them
and I get pattern and so on but yeah I'm
not a techy guy in in the same say I I
enjoy I like to have an analog life not
a digital life riding a bicycle is
analog walk is analog you know sitting
and meditating is analogue uh you know I
of course you can also listen through
the internet to a good thing that helps
you meditate or go to sleep don't me
understand me but I don't have this
fascination with things and so on I mean
some people do but it seems like a lot
of people have a fascination with the
future you seem very grounded in the
present I've never read a single book of
Science Fiction most of the people I
work with and I admire them they all
come with ideas from books and science
fiction they always say did you read
this or that and I have no idea I never
liked it I like to read about real
people with real blood and real feelings
science fiction to me is devoid of that
it's imagining you know droids doing
this or that I couldn't care less uh you
know as I always think that physicists
must love science fiction because never
never never read a single book or looked
at it in a movie or science fiction I
couldn't care less I don't I don't
relate to that I I don't think that
these people display human like Behavior
anyhow so I mean I'm not saying that
it's not interesting to others I mean I
you're not a futurist no no even though
they call me futurist because I always
anticipate things right but you're not
somebody who like thinks about what life
is going to be like a 100 years from now
no no I I like to know life is now yes
yes uh and I also as Neil Bor once said
it is hard to predict anything
especially the future okay we all
predict the past very well I don't know
what's going to go I mean you know we
seen things happening indeed
unbelievable things I mean the
technology that allows you to become
such a worldwide known phenomenon is
because of the technology imagine if you
were just declaiming the uh Roman senate
uh centuries ago very few people exactly
what I'm doing now but with no
microphones or cameras okay so yeah I
I'm not a futurist and that's it the
people tell me I am because I anticipate
things but not because I imagine you
know a world in which you know I I I
couldn't collect about going to Mars for
instance even though Elon Mar thinks
it's very important do you think it's a
cool project I don't know I I what I I
want to ask him why and then he tells me
things like he says things like well you
know civilization is going to die here
we're going to fix it and so I don't
know I mean let it let it happen I don't
know just enjoy now you know you're not
worried about the future in that sense
oh I'm an optimist I believe that
technology will solve the global warming
problem everything it's obvious how to
solve it there's nothing very mysterious
you know nuclear power is going to do it
you know absolutely I once we get out
over our preconceived notions of nuclear
power right I mean very few people have
ever died of a nuclear accident let's
face it yeah they need to name it
something else mightbe yeah might like
many things that at once were thought to
be dangerous when renamed we you know
turn out to not be so dangerous that
when renamed people are willing to adopt
yeah yeah right yeah so yeah I I don't
really you know I don't worry too much
about the future I I think that people
are ingenious and wise enough to to
stare away from the brink hopefully you
don't seem to worry too much generally
you're not a big worrier M yeah no yeah
you and I are different that way H you
and I are different that way yeah you
you worry a lot yes um not if I keep
busy oh okay um these days a lot less I
think that um I think at the transition
points between different circumstances
and
at the transition points between
different career things I think it makes
sense to worry it sort of drives some of
the urgency to make sure that you know
you you know reach for the next rung and
and and grab it right and not you know
not miss I mean there's been I I think
there's been elements of uncertainty in
my life where I felt like okay I'm going
to ground the things I can control but
no I I don't stay up at night worrying
about things yeah also I think
meditation is is profoundly effective at
this suddenly you're here and that's the
is the past is a past you cannot do
anything and the future hasn't arrived
so what the heck you know I I really
believe that and it has helped me
immensely uh I I'm very the few things
I'm very proud I I I went for my medical
checkup a year ago and the doctor says
I'd love to hear you breathe I said
what's wrong with my breathe say it's so
slow and calm so you got over the White
Coat Syndrome yes yeah because of
meditation yeah you send me your lab
results this morning so everything
everything looks great people always
been you know regular about exercise not
excessive you're never one of the like
the marathoners or the you know 500 a.m.
in the pool people but no I tried run to
running marathon actually uh so yeah I
mean it's very common in the area where
you know in around Stanford to be pretty
extreme about Athletics that was never
your thing no steady longdistance
running yeah I told you that once I'm
not a sprinter yeah some people are by
the way I admire them immensely you mean
in life we speaking met in general yeah
some people who really can do things
incredibly fast and they move from one
thing to the other and and so on I yeah
I I I like people who reflect some
wisdom for instance I have a it's very
strange for someone like me but I see a
a Buddhist monk and I just suddenly I
feel Cal by just seeing that person you
know um I don't know I there's something
it's not just the spirituality the power
they have to be here totally and
absolutely uh it's impressive to me I
mean some of people say okay got funny
robes or something you know I like that
a lot uh not it's not necessarily a way
I mean my therapist used to stale me and
that to use meditation to move away from
uh trouble and and trou troubling
thoughts is not a good idea so you have
to embrace the world too but I I use it
so just to stay calm and to enjoy and to
see things for what they are and I think
it's yeah yeah the future is the future
I I don't know well you can only control
what you can control right that's but
you know there's some people are worry
all the time about the future you know
given um your understanding of quantum
mechanics
relativity and the real world um and
perhaps just generally knowing what you
know and experiencing what you've
experienced do you believe in some sort
of higher power organizing force or
let's just be blunt do you believe in
god well okay the word of God has a lot
of implications right I mean I don't
necessarily I don't believe in a God
that keeps track of what you and I are
doing at this point there are too many
people and so on uh so I don't believe
in this notion of U you know of an agent
there that is somehow knowing what what
everybody on this planet is doing or you
know and so on I I do feel sometimes and
especially because of the the studies I
have I uh and actually from reading
people who have been very very deep you
know in particular the thoughts of
people like Einstein Heisenberg and so
on that there seems to be be at times a
sense of an organizing principle in the
universe and to learn those rules so
there is this notion I mean
philosophically it's called pantheism
that God is in nature already spos and
all these people study this that I is
very appealing to me the notion that uh
there there is something that this thing
is is if it's evolving it's like an
entity but not an entity that says oh
tomorrow you know you'll die or so on I
mean you'll die you die there are lots
of events that lead to death or to
happiness and so on but not because
someone is out there checking I mean I
don't believe that is's enough memory to
store all this although today I saw you
you can buy sandis terabytes that this
big so I I I don't I don't believe in
that but it's a matter of belief not not
anything else and unfortunately these
beliefs are you know translate sometimes
in complicated action I I do believe
that there is a sense of mystery I uh uh
I I sometimes uh I once heard U I don't
know who said it but it's a very good
sentence that if you listen to betov and
say I mean the man struggled but it's
amazing he was able to create that music
on the other hand mozar seems to have
been getting the messages from Heavens
you know on a daily basis just Flo it
down so some people are given this
connection to something much bigger and
you act you have access to that through
listening to that music the experiences
we have there is this idea out there
that Consciousness doesn't just exist
within our brains but as sort of a like
a Collective Network and things come
through us not just as individuals but
as thing is a a lot of that I was I I'm
very interested in the word spiritual
and and what it means you know to see
that things transcend our particular
needs at any point but the idea of a God
that tells you one thing or the other is
funny you know if you look at any movie
you know braveart or whatever you see
the one Warrior one group of Warriors
has a pre saying God is with us and the
other one is about to engage and says
the same thing to the other group uh
that's a little bit funny right I mean I
think humans and human brains in
particular are amazing amazing what
human brains can do this computer in our
heads is spectacular and yet it also has
limitations and I think um well but
differently do does it um make you
nervous or worry you that I seem to have
an increasing interest in God and
religion no I think that is a beautiful
journey in which you're in and and there
are two pieces to this
uh provided you don't you don't start
using this to to somehow spout uh you
know arguments why people shouldn't do
this or that no no it's only my own
exploration of my own I respect that I
think it's a very important and thing uh
you know there is an issue here that I
read reading Wilson actually IO Wilson
which you know he wrote this beautiful
book on human nature and he claims that
the religious Instinct comes out of a
submissive component in us that animals
have dogs are submissive and we believe
that we need to be submissive to a King
and to something Beyond a king you know
some deity or something El that's his
theory I certainly don't feel any
compulsion to be submissive to other
humans I mean I think in knowing the
limitations of the human brain and
cognition I don't care how smart I don't
care how successful an individual or a
group is like it's very clear that the
human brain is limited and parsing the
universe that we're in otherwise we
wouldn't continue to have the same
issues over and over although I do like
to think that we're falling forward
we're evolving forward as opposed to
devolving as a species but we tend to
repeat a lot of the same mistakes over
and over also there's also a technical
thing here we sometimes confuse
Randomness with premonition or or God
doing something I mean dodging a bullet
by turning your head as our next
president did is an incredible thing the
probability is so so so small but that
doesn't mean that there was someone who
said tally head do it and so the bully
will pass I mean we ascribe causality to
something that was truly random it could
have also in another scenario the same
turn of the head would have been to the
other side and this person would be dead
so I but but sometimes we are confronted
with these incredible
coincidences that we cannot explain and
we say oh must be God that made sure
that you and I met or that we we thought
the same thoughts and so on although as
a uh biologist who started off as a
neurodevelopmental biologist I think I
just had to see there are two things
that changed my understanding of what
might be possible one was Barbara
Chapman my adviser once treated me to an
experiment it was kind of a funny thing
typical Barbara you know how nerdy she
was she said um are are you willing to
stay up all night and I was like okay
yeah and she took zebra fish um eggs and
fertilized them and I sat for 11 hours
with food I got up to use the restroom
and I watched a zebra fish egg duplicate
and become a fish like in real time with
my eyes not some movie on YouTube
although that's impressive too people
can look these up but to just actually
see life emerge from a set of cells
through its own organizing principles
all of which can be explained by genes
transcription factors the physics of the
mitotic spindle all I mean math and
biology and chemistry can explain all of
it but there was something truly
spectacular about it that seems so
non-random because it's not random and
then the other one is that I mean I
guess I've had enough experiences with
prayer and the consequences of Prayer my
real life that I just I sort can't get
my head around the idea that there's not
a God or some sort of organizing Force I
just I I can't accept it because there's
yes there's causality reverse causality
correlation and mistaken correlation and
causality but somehow like I mean I I
like to think I'm grounded in science
and reality but I don't think science
can explain it all oh no and I think
that this experience of the of this
spirituality for instance I remember and
still happens
spending a night outdoors and looking at
the sky I mean is an incredible thing
the stars and you you feel so small and
yet there is order to all that it's not
just random stuff I mean they move
according to laws that fortunately we
humans were able to discover which is an
amazing thing when you think about it
dogs did not discover gravity you know
not Costello okay Costello was gravity
yeah so I I really think that there is
something to be said about these
spiritual experiences and I I really
believe that importantly and I listen to
people talk I recently I've been looking
at some stuff that CS Lewis you know uh
he was a man who be was studying the the
sagas and the mythology of the Vikings
and so on and eventually became a devout
Christian uh you know thinking that this
was the only answer to the because all
religions have the same element um so I
I understand that uh I respect it I I
experienced that you know at times in my
life but when I think seriously about it
I think that the moment you know we we
have this computer and you know we we
can get glimpses of all this but I don't
be I don't believe that it's this notion
no one can prove to me that there is
someone there organizing my life minute
by minute or second by second I don't
believe that I do believe that there are
fantastic chances in life and Randomness
beautiful ones okay and uh you know
having you and and Lara has children is
in fantastic Randomness in my life
hopefully it wasn't too random no no in
the sense that you know children you
know you know children that come
unhealthy whatever I mean you know it's
it's a very impressive thing yeah the
number of things that have to organized
to create exactly a healthy child is
it's truly a miracle yeah true true yeah
and I think but a lot of it is random
too you know I mean the same the same
set of parents can produce two different
set of children too okay I mean that
that's a very very important and I are
pretty different oh absolutely but in in
very beautiful ways too so I mean
neither of you does behave or or
conducts a life that you know I would be
unhappy your mother would be unhappier
with so but going back to this the I I
believe that indeed spirituality is
import I have a lot of access to that
through classical music there are times
that I really believe that is it I mean
I can get very very emotional listening
to music very emotional uh you know my
wife always notices it when I I do that
and I I think that then you're having
access to something very different of
course it can be explained
physiologically by all sorts of
resonances and so on but who cares you
know you mentioned that you can peer
into the future with ideas that you're
working on um and and yet you don't get
too far ahead like you're not thinking
like a 100 years from now what's it
going to look like do you spend a lot of
time thinking about the past sometimes
sometimes and there is a I've always
because I left my my family very when I
was still very young I always had a
certain Nostalgia for things okay um I I
met a I became friend with a very
impressive guy uh in France clart I
think he was the director of The
geophysics Institute and both of us had
very similar parents in different you
know French and Argentina but still and
similar educations and we we had I have
sometimes a certain Nostalgia that is
almost Melancholia about the way we grew
up and so on melan a little bit about it
I mean I I recall your stories about
growing up in Argentina like you would
have 10 15 cousins over for lunch every
Sunday yeah was very that doesn't sound
melan no but there were moments moments
of loneliness moments of times where I
felt very
misunderstood uh I I I had unfortunately
a very punishing mother uh so that but I
still remember her and I think about her
in ways that are not necessarily always
very happy I was looking at photos a
while ago and I there are pictures of
her that is you know she's smiling
coming out of the Pacific Ocean in in
Carmel she took a walk and so on but uh
I I I reflect back in the past in that
sense I mean and sometimes you know I'm
asked you know how did you grow up uh my
wife being Danish she grew up in a very
different way from you know upper middle
class argentines uh so you know that we
we reflect on that you know the kinds of
childhoods we had and so on but not not
in the sense that you know oh I wish I
had that now uh no regrets well not many
not many I mean good uh I mean I there
is one regret that is more theoretical
than anything else which is if I look at
my family my brother State produce
family children grandchildren and so on
I came here and I produce children
grandchildren and there are going to be
two diersing branches of the family uh
not should we still get together we got
together last year for your birthday
yeah no I know that's what is so
important to me yes but I think about it
sometimes and when I go back and I see
the lives very similar to what I had or
you know different perhaps there is a
certain you know sense of think about
the past but I also realize that if I
didn't take the steps I took I would be
as miserable as some of my old friends
that are really struggling even to find
meaning in what they do or even
surviving economically so I was really
lucky well so was I cuz I wouldn't have
existed because you wouldn't have met
Mom that's true too yeah yeah exactly I
mean maybe you would have but no no no
no but I'm grateful I didn't grow up in
buos ciris I love I love the city I love
the country I couldn't have done any of
the things I've done in South America
given Maybe but the landscape was just
completely oh I go there and after a
week I want to come back yeah yeah
definitely you love this country I love
this country I feel very much part of
this country I'm very grateful to what
this country has done for me for my
family and that includes you and your
sister okay and my wife when did you
become a citizen oh many many years ago
and I really did it consciously not not
because I mean I mean they were
practical things but no I I I really
believe in it I really believe is an
incredible country and gives incredible
opportunities to people uh as Elan says
El ask I'm also an immigrant I'm very
happy to be one yeah you've always been
a patriot absolutely and on the other
hand as I said Argentina is complicated
I go there and a lot of smells and
things that you know bring memories that
are amazing huh the food's not bad yeah
yeah but it's also the whole the whole
atmosphere and the first two three days
are are an incredible experience of
meeting friends and talking with them
and so on but after a while I also see
the a darker side to it I must tell you
that on the other hand my country-
in-law Denmark is also a country that I
like immensely uh there nice people and
pleasant and soft very soft especially
in summer but the Danes are also strong
people like they they're the average
Dane is so smart I think the high school
education there must be among the best
in the world yeah there is a there is a
notion of proficiency I mean people are
proficient that what they do yeah you
you go to a store you go to you have a
problem an airline or whatever you get
someone who really knows how to solve it
but there's also a a very it's a small
Society very homogeneous tremendous
sense of humor which I enjoy um and it's
very soft people you know enjoy life
they have Notions like slow food
movements and things of that sort so I
like it I I could not live there because
it's you know it's a very homogeneous
way of Behaving you know the the
Lutheran ethic is there they're not
religious but they're Lutheran um so I I
feel very comfortable in Europe and so
on but I like like being here yes yeah I
feel like um our family now includes so
many different nationalities and
religions and backgrounds and
philosophies and political stances to
yeah it's great it's starting to look
like the UN with some extra you I I grew
up in a family that had an ideological
diversity was incredible incredible
that's good you know so that that was
also good to be as a child to hear these
arguments about politics and so on you
know yeah I hear a few of those now yeah
arguments about politics we won't get
into politics one thing that I did want
to say however is that um I remember a
long time ago and I'm certain because I
wrote it in my journal you said
Politically Incorrect views are often
right is that true still yes yes still
true for you I should say yes absolutely
absolutely because this has only to be
judged in time okay um I I think that
the issue of political incorrectness is
is some kind of a mob behavior that says
you should think like us okay we should
be able to express our views with
respecting others and so on and we
should be respected for that I think
that this whole notion that others are
telling you what to think or not to
think is is a little bit complicated and
I I must say something which I hope it
doesn't get me in trouble with my Dany
side of the family or friends societies
like the Scandinavian societies that are
extremely uniform in thinking the word
should is used all the
time yeah you should do this you
shouldn't do that good that you did it
it you know it's a very they enforce
behavior in a very very particular way
it's not a hurting Instinct but there is
a very very strict Lutheran tradition of
telling you what you should and you
shouldn't do so I know very few people
and I've been going to D for many many
years that really have I canoc clastic
ideas that are away from the mean and
they're considered
odd okay very few including the
physicists and they they have fantastic
School of physics there Neil Bor was
there so it it's a society that
Conformity is the issue there right so
on the other hand I think that it's good
to to think differently and uh you know
uh there's a man perhaps you heard of
him I know where I mean I admire him he
died Freeman Dyson he was on a level
with fan and Gelman by the way he used
to have very strange ideas too he used
to say global warming what's wrong with
it the Sahara is going to be a
garden and what yeah you know the Sahara
Desert will become a garden people will
able to eat all that food well I think
people hear that but then they countered
against these um you know very
heart-wrenching pictures of like polar
bears on ice caps that are shrinking
this kind of thing there are more polar
bears today than when Mr Al Gore said
that we're going to die listen I'm not
going to argue climate change with you
because I have
no no no no I'm I'm I'm not I'm not
countering I'm just saying you know like
uh it I mean this this is getting very
intense on the internet now because the
arguments on both sides seem pretty
strong at least as they're presented so
who's right now the question is what can
we do about it that's the issue and I
think that technology and wisdom are
going to solve it I think so I I really
believe that very strongly I'm an
optimist when it comes to that but what
I'm talking about being Politically
Incorrect is this idea of saying things
that a group of people say you shouldn't
be saying or thinking those thoughts and
the question is can we debate those
things rationally or nicely respecting
people's beliefs okay and I I yeah I
believe in that very strongly and I
think being Politically Incorrect is a
way of saying you're you're sort of
you're smiling at them but it's it's
okay why not you know it's a you know
who said that we shouldn't be like that
I remember encountering the first
Libertarians when I was already you know
working as a physicist and they were
saying to me why should we why we why
are why are we afraid of the Russians I
say well you know well you think they're
going to invade the United States can
you imagine Russia invading I mean if
they invaded how they going to control
us you know they had these arguments
they were very funny arguments you know
why do we need an army why do we need
taxes and I really thought that was so
provocative so interesting do you
consider yourself a Libertarian in many
ways I like I like the idea of Liberty I
believe very strongly in it I mean this
country was founded on that I think that
our founding fathers really believed in
it and I admire them for that uh I you
know the the reading Jefferson and so on
is really inspiring to me I think that
some of the political movement is a
little bit odd they always end up with
political Pol itical candidates that go
nowhere and so on why do you think that
is why do you think that is I think if
they're so rational they're often among
the smartest people they not the most C
they are not strategically smart yeah
I've met I met at times Libertarians
that think you know incredible thoughts
and you know they work they live in
Silicon Valley and they're poor I mean
even though they are the ones who are
supposed to some are poor some are some
are not but but I'm saying it's very
interesting they choose presidential
candidates no one ever heard of I think
many of them are uh you know they are on
the Spectrum in a way that doesn't allow
them to get into the minds of other
people in a way that would allow them to
convince other people how about their
arguments I mean a lot of Politics As We
Know show business I mean in this recent
election it was it was all posturing it
was all about grabbing emotion it was
not about logic it was about emotion
yeah I have several of my people that
you know they they they put all their
money to freeze themselves you going to
cryo yourself no my dad and I have had
this running joke for a lot of years
because someone we know very well and
several people we know well have set
aside significant amounts of money to
have their heads or entire bodies Frozen
on the idea that they're going to be
brought back later Han Solo style um
you've always laughed at this idea no
but not only that I I there's a
colleague of mine at Stanford who
accuses me of being friends with a guy
that is like that and I told this guy I
said you know he thinks that I you're a
bad influence on me and the guy said
well tell him that we are the ones who
are going to come back and do what we
believe he's going to be gone you don't
you're not interested in living to be
200 it's not an issue these people are
interested in living for another
thousand years so when they wake up they
see how the world look they read science
fiction so they're very interested to
know what the world looks like once they
wake up so well there are people in the
health space that are trying to not die
you know Brian Johnson and others I mean
that's a different story yeah I mean
what's your thought on on trying to live
to be 150 or something like that well if
you can live the issue is not the age is
the conditions of your body and mind
okay that's the issue I had the
fortunate unfortunate of having two
parents that live very long lives one
was incredibly my father was incredibly
Los it until the end my mother had
everything you know all every dementia
and complications that came from you
know being an anorexic all her life and
so on so my father enjoyed being Lucid
until the end and so he he you know he
didn't take care of himself physically
so well so the idea is if you live up to
100 or 150 or 200 and you can still do
the things you eny joy in life is one
thing to be like my mother who couldn't
even comprehend what was in front of her
when you put a cup of tea you know then
then he very sad but it can happen at
the age of 35 you know so yeah I I I'm
not into a race to live forever uh I
want to live healthily I want to enjoy
life enjoyment is the most important
piece what's the point of being you know
Tethered to tubes all over the place you
know flat flat on a bed and you say oh I
made it another year of my life I mean
that's not really a life at least for
me do you worry about or and or wish for
anything for me for Lara yes to be super
happy people no I don't want to use the
word happy I want to see you joyful joy
joy is more important than happiness joy
is a state of mind happiness is okay
yeah I I I set a list of things I want
to have and I have him and I smile a lot
joyfulness is this sense of being in
yourself and I would like that I mean
you two are very different Lara lives
much more in the moment that you do uh
for reasons yeah okay her her view of
it's her demeanor huh it's very good I
focused on what she's going to do this
weekend yes I'm focused on what I'm
going to do this weekend next week the
next month and I would personally like
to see you enjoying today and this
weekend and that's it and everything
else going to come to you I believe and
you know now I'm speaking in a way that
is more paternal than anything else I've
been you you had have a Charmed Life and
everything came to you since you were
very little and you you exhibited um you
know behaviors and so on that everybody
was even smilingly impressed with you
from the very beginning I mean it's not
that you were a genius at chess or
Rubik's Cube or anything I know some
kids that are like that but there was
something something in there and so I
think that you know learning to just
relax and rest but it's part of your
behavior since you were little you had
these problems okay I used to take put
put you on my lap and say it's going to
be fine and say well what if I cannot do
my homework okay but you could or even
my stuffed animals yeah yeah yeah they
say they gave you organized and probably
have remember I had the the grunting
tick yes yeah oh yeah that was yeah I
probably drove us nuts well I probably
have a little bit of an OCD type thing I
mean not diagnostically you know
significant but but when I bite down
into something that I'm pursuing it's
very hard for me to think about anything
else well we talked about it when you
were at Berkeley once you told me that
you were starting to run but you wanted
to run like everybody else was running I
how many miles and know I heard there
was a guy in who had been in the
department Randy Nelson he's now a
professor in Ohio somebody just like off
you know just in passing said oh yeah
you know Randy worked you know like 80
hours a week or 90 hours a week and I
was like 95 hours yeah I remember that
you know but what's interesting is I'm
not a naturally competitive person it
was just this idea like I've tended to
want to know how I've and I've since
stopped this but there was a long time
where I wanted to figure out what my
body and mind were capable of I just
wanted to see like how high is that
ceiling and it was only when I almost
suffocated on a scuba dive or when I was
working to the point of exhaustion or
you know where and then I also realized
that you know I published a number of
papers to get 10 you're like I didn't
need that many but I enjoyed every one
it's not like I'm not having fun I'm
having fun yeah this idea of pushing
oneself to limit the question is why I
mean I I think there is so much to enjoy
on a on a regular life and the things
that we have already we have to work to
get them the way we want but I I don't
think that worrying for the sake of
worrying or you know just worrying I
mean yeah I don't tend to worry well you
know what changed that for me in a major
way I mean I've had moments I've had
moments I think I can recall like I have
a favorite best day of my life moment I
won't share it here it's not it's not
relevant right now but Costello helped
bring me into the moment like he would
do these things that like I would light
in that were just so simple like the way
he would like like fall over or
something or you know that I think that
like having another creature there that
that is very much in the moment brings
you into the moment right and you were
very connected to it too I mean I think
that if you were connected to someone
that has that property of bringing you
down and so on you would start enjoying
it I yeah the people I've I've had
amazing Partners as you know um some
less than amazing but many amazing
partners and the and they tended to be
also kind of into the future like focus
on what's not quite there yet but I must
say I think women in general do it
better than men that they're better like
grounding to the present well depends I
I think that my wife tends to be more
anxious than I am about the future so
maybe it's not gated I tend well in in
trying to sort of you know tell her that
she shouldn't worry so much uh I think
that I also suddenly reflect what am I
doing here and I try to also slow down
myself I I think that you know yeah I I
think you're someone who's running from
one thing to the other I mean to say it
colloquially but it would be nice if you
said okay I'm fine um you know you have
a podcast that's doing well you don't
have to worry what the podcast is going
to be doing in five
years I don't think out that far I don't
think about the career piece I I think
that I um I mean I often don't have a
plan I I know what we're going to do
this year I don't know what we're going
to do after that but professionally I
think um look I think part of it was
science I mean we're talking about a lot
of things but for many years right from
the time I like squared my life away and
when I turned 19 it was like okay I'm
going to get things right now there's
always been these Milestones you're
going to finish your undergraduate
degree I did a master the PHD then the
post off then you need to get 10 year
you know I think the academic system was
a system of two to five
year bursts like like sprinting
marathons in many ways to try and you
know grab the next thing to get to the
next level and there was a lot of
uncertainty for a long time you know I
think I'm finally now coming into a
place of certainty
like feelings of like oh like things are
things are good and they've gone great
but yeah but it's it's hard oh of course
it's hard especially if you have that
kind of temperament yes and I think you
need to train yourself almost to um I I
just had it set of the words that are
it's a it's a matter of bringing
Elegance into your life almost to live
it in a way that is elegant is nice in
it in itself you know uh that that is
important uh uh one of the things I
learned I mean you know uh living with a
Dane Danes don't like you to eat
standing they they sit they set a table
and they light a candle and you know
it's very nice it creates a pace yeah
the ritual the ritual rituals are very
important and also the other thing that
is very important and I discovered is to
have something to look forward to you
cannot just wake up one day say and now
what there has to be something okay
that's important I mean you know we all
we all have that so Rogan talks about
this thing about you know because he has
you know podcast he does four four
episodes a week plus he's an announcer
of the UFC he has his comedy career he
raised he has three kids he's in a happy
marriage and you know he's really into
working out and all this and he I heard
something recently it was actually the
forward to Cameron haynes's book I was
listening to it and he it was amazing he
said you know you have to approach your
life no no matter how busy or how simple
as a kind of work of art like you can't
just think of it as daily life you have
to have some macroscopic view of this so
that you know where to put things and
and it's a lot of what you're saying as
well Elegance yeah life has to have
Elegance otherwise it's just uh disjoint
moments and so sometimes they will be
like that and it can be very creative
too but most of the the the the idea is
to really get into something I mean I I
personally think that when you you
describe me as being very steady or
whatever sounds very boring too for that
matter right I mean I don't know I mean
there's a beauty in steadiness because
from places of steadiness you can take
good risks well right I mean and I think
that my mind is not you know in a in a
steady you know state but I I don't have
this notion I have to see things
everybody's talking about something I
have to see it I I never felt like that
no I mean I I'd like to see things don't
misunderstand me but I it's very
important for me to be in the moment and
do things the way I like them to do yeah
you don't seem to need to go on like
jungle Adventures or like or ice skate
across Antarctica like like you've never
been one for like the the kind of wild
OU in no the wild outing is here uh
that's my wild outing yeah I I I have I
can have very uh wild thoughts about
things that I would like you know
sometimes they're totally wrong and so
on but yeah I'm in a funny way I I am a
little bit of what the French call in
armchair philosopher or whatever there
are these people who write write
articles about France and if Africa
without ever having left France or
something that sort so I'm not like that
but I I don't I don't necessarily um
crave this
physical adventure for the sake of
Adventure I like beautiful things and I
don't mind repeating the same beautiful
thing every every year if necessary
going vacation to the same places and so
on yeah you like to go back to the same
places well there is a difference
between tourism where you new see new
things and so on I like that it's also
the idea of vacation where you just sit
and enjoy what you have you know I I I I
confess I've I've not ever done it and
you know this about me I've never taken
a vacation you know to the summer house
in Denmark you can spend a week there
just enjoying it that's it I don't know
if I show you pictures you know from the
window they see the deer in the garden
you know they just sit there you know
it's nice so there's nothing you know
it's it's nice it can be you canot spend
a life doing that you know I'm not a
monk okay I'm not a meditator that will
spend hours on this but you know it's
it's nice to rest you know is the very
important I think and the rituals are
important to you very important yes yeah
the rituals have a also are very
reassuring because then you know it's
predictable right you don't want a
totally unpredictable life all the time
that's what people create rituals you
know you early on uh taught me about
etiquette mhm um you know it's it's
something that uh years later I think it
was probably in the mid90s uh for some
reason we were at the movies together
and and we saw some people at the movies
and they were wearing their um their
bathroom
slippers and um more or less their
pajamas to the movies and I'll never
forget you grabbed my arm like you
didn't grab it forcefully you grab it
you said you see that I said yeah and he
said people are coming to the movies in
their pajamas I said yeah and you said
that's the beginning of the end to any
society and I thought you were joking
but you know it's it's something I
thought about a lot you also said and
and I'll never forget um you know you're
always better off being overdressed
because then at least your class that
you're speaking to or your hosts of um
Etc they know that you took them
seriously right and
um I don't think we really appreciate
eate we sort like as Americans
especially we've somehow confused
Freedom of Choice with um discarding
etiquette yes um yeah like it's not
something you he discussed very much but
what what about etiquette and what well
there are many components I I think the
most important one is a societal one I
mean one of the things that I like for
instance if you if you go to England
polite people are politeness is a virtue
and politeness the higher the the CL the
social class the higher the demand to be
polite is it's behavior is is is being
nice to people it's understanding what
they are and associated with that there
are codes some of them are behavioral
some of them are dress codes um I had a
brilliant uh Economist Italian economist
working with me and now he's in the east
coast who told me he went to a wedding
in in Italy after living in the United
States and he went to his cousin's
wedding and his uncle said you you show
no respect you're not wearing cufflinks
he said well but my shirt is all but no
no no go home and get cinks because
you're showing lack of respect for not
dressing the proper way to this wedding
so I think that there are expectations
that people have about certain kinds of
behavior I mean if you look at say the
pictures of what's going on now in
Washington Swan you notice that Mr Elon
Musk who's always in a t-shir that says
let's go to Mars suddenly he's wearing a
tuxedo because now he's now a he's part
of it
group of people that are behaving like
government officials should behave you
know you don't go in sandals and shorts
but Silicon Valley is famous for the
flip-flops in the hoodie right because
the problem is that people confuse the
the the style with the me the message
with they think that because you wear a
hoodie because Mark Zuckerberg was
wearing hoodies makes you brilliant okay
and I think that the issue of dress
codes elist it a certain sense of
behavior in people as you said I mean
you know how would you feel if you went
on a first day with someone that comes
in in in in her you know slippers and
and path R let's go to the movies it's
not happened yet okay but okay so so
what I'm saying is you don't have to
overdo it I I'm you know that's another
issue and and you have to also conform
to the roles of the society I noticed
for instance that in the east coast
people dress much more properly than in
the west coast you go to New York and
you see men wearing suits and ties here
you don't see that here perhaps in La
not in not in in the Bay Area ever yeah
one thing that you pointed out is that
at any wedding in
Argentina um men keep their jackets and
ties on the whole night I I've always
kept my jacket and tie on the entire
night in the United States it's almost
like moments um after people arrive at
any party in a suit they start
undressing yeah right why did they dress
up then yeah okay so that's my view so I
am not necessarily someone that
Advocates wearing a tie when I go to
work and so on but I really believe that
there are codes of conduct that sort of
reflect many things and you're also
you're you're projecting a message right
you're giv I mean the idea of a hoodie
at one point or the other first of all
was hurting Behavior everybody had to
wear one because you know then then
you're cool or you know whatever okay in
adolescence I understand it I mean
that's what you do as an adolescent you
do what others do but as you grow up you
can also signal whom you are by the way
you dress and you you know you behave
what do you think about the discourse on
platforms like X where you can see a mix
including a lot of academics and high
level thinkers acting kind of like
teenagers well okay that's they want to
be popular that's all they want to draw
attention this kind of a new thing I
mean I mean there I mean I won't name
names but you know some of some people
who are considered some of the smartest
people in the world um like what they
their discourse on social media is like
I mean they wouldn't last two seconds on
the schoolyard they get hit in the face
you know they like weird like like grown
men acting kind of like teenagers okay
well that's they have a problem because
they want to be thought of as young
that's a whole different story okay
that's a different story now having said
what I said I respect that some people
eventually reflect on whether or not the
rules the rules that Reg you know that
rule you know the rules that say how you
should dress to do one thing or the
other are not do not uh you know operate
for you and then you decide to be very
different um you know there are many
people who are like that and like to be
iconoclastic I heard many stories about
we were talking about Richard fan who
actually made a case I mean Mary galman
used to say that about him to be so
different that people will talk about it
because he was very interested in people
telling stories about it Bongo drumming
naked on the roof not rushing his teeth
exactly all that okay so but he he he
was very good at drawing attention okay
that's fine you can also draw attention
by dressing very nicely uh you know it's
all it's all a matter of uh I mean I was
reflecting you know we we go to the
symphony in San Francisco uh regularly
and we are donors and so on sometimes
you go to a concert it's an amazing
thing what you see there some people
nicely dressed so people dress us they
just woke up they didn't have time to
get rest and you know got there you know
and their whatever and they do you think
that going back to the the initial you
know ping of the question do you think
that um that we have Society gone that
we're sort of drifting towards like for
lack of a better word chaos so so so
social interaction chaos well you know I
think the pendulum will swing again the
other day I was talking to some reading
actually that suddenly uh not only in
New York but in the midwest men are
starting to wear jacket and ties not
just for work okay they go on dates like
that so you know it's a pendulum he goes
back and forth back and forth I don't
think we're going to end up in a time
when you know you have to wear tails to
to have a breakfast or something I I
think only the aristocrats used to do
that but I I think that you know it's an
issue of how also how we perceive the
World Through The Eyes of television and
movies okay if movie start showing that
everybody's dressed whatever you know
people are going to do the same thing if
movies start showing you know the trends
that we see in movies are the trends
that essentially Society follows okay
definitely so I think that we we this is
I don't think we're going to chaos it's
going to revert uh California is a
particular place because it has always
been a place where people in order to
feel free they had to dress differently
and who cares and all that stuff but
it's not everywhere yeah it's kind of
interesting that now counterculture is
conservativism right right right we're
back to we're back to that the anti-war
group is the more conservative anyway
it's also people like you know it's
interesting how Americans are fascinated
with um English aristocracy and
traditions I've been to high table din
at King's College in Cambridge twice um
you know everybody dresses properly they
wear gowns and the fellows are sitting
in a top table and everybody else and
and people love it and we like to see
that in the movies well it's theater
yeah I mean it's academic theater a
little bit of Pomp and Circumstance but
it's theater nice well we have the same
thing on commencement you know
traditions and so yeah no parent wants
to go to a graduation that's you know
kind of a free-for-all they want to see
some order absolutely absolutely and I
think that you know there is a place for
that and some people will I mean there
are designers and so on of clothing and
so on that exploit this Nostalgia for
that kind of elegant world you know ra
Lauren and so it's always you know 1960s
fancy uh you know Club typ clothing and
so
so do you plan to ever
retire I don't know what he means I mean
is reti no no because I I'm not a postal
worker I I'm not a cook at a restaurant
that eventually says Okay I I cooked it
long enough that I I collect my
retirement and go home I have a mind
that it works and I need an environment
where that mind can can Thrive and I
need an environment where they you know
for one year when I when I left H
Packard I was basically I took a course
in general activity and so on but I was
really a bit Idol so suddenly I'm mean
in a context where people have problems
so on that I really like to listen to
there's a social component to work as
you know so retirement is retirement
means what you know you're a postal
working one day you stop delivering mail
and you stay home watching the pain dry
and that's not me okay so to me I I'm
working and I enjoy it and uh you know
the day that will come that I cannot
enjoy it I'll stop and I think that
again goes through this issue of getting
bored with things that you you don't
like to do very you know because you've
done it for a long long time um no I
enjoy my life but I don't think in terms
of Ed I I'll say something my my the the
CEO of my company he a great guy Phil
mckenny said Bernardo I don't work for
the money here I said I don't either I
mean I like to get paid but if I don't
like it I walk and I can do that so it's
not that I'm doing this for the income
that's what I'm trying to say seems like
you've never pursued money for its own
sake no nor did you ever encourage me to
pursue money for its own sake but as my
cousin the physic used to say money
doesn't bring happiness but it points in
the right direction I would say money
doesn't bring happiness but it can
buffer stress right and it allows you to
have the things you want to have and you
don't have to no absolutely absolutely
yeah I think money is an important
aspect of Our Lives you know having it
and so on I live for many years as a
graduate student with no money and it
was very painful I'll tell you sometimes
I didn't eat dinner because I didn't
have any money so uh so I like having
money to do the things that I like but I
don't work for money
uh many people say well you know I
invented so many things I could have
started in some of these companies and
and make a lot of money I don't really I
don't regret that at all the ultra rich
people that I know who are happy are
still working every day right because
Beyond a certain amount of money you
still have to brush your teeth like
everybody else okay you can dream of
having 150 toothbrushes but so what
right and you can only eat so many
steaks yeah yeah I mean that we all
cover the question is what do with your
life now you want to travel well you can
travel it's nice if you can travel you
know in in better ways than being a you
know an undergrad with a your backpack
although can be Advent have fun
backpacking on a limited budget where
you know part of part of the joy of
traveling that way is you're you're
thrown into kind of street level
interactions use hosts and things like
that I went through Europe like I
wouldn't change that for anything no I
went through Europe as a graduate
student I quit everything I went to
Europe in winter and it was quite an
adventure and the was hor friend us and
I have very little money I stayed in
places where the in in Paris where the
lady in the in the little hotel would
turn off the light if I turn it on in
the middle of the night it was awful and
yet to save energy yeah yeah yeah yeah
and it was very funny but I met people
that were interesting and I I engage you
know it was I still I still every once
in a while I hear from one or two of
those people I met years ago in trains I
went by train everywhere I ended up in
Denmark in the middle of winter you know
everything seems lead back to Denmark
yeah it's a nice country well now you
have a Danish wife so and have for a
long time and have for a long time many
times yeah yeah no I yeah I like it's a
very different contrast to Europe This
Central Europe and so on you know
Denmark northern Europe uh Denmark
Sweden Norway is a very special kind of
you know country and people yeah I like
them a lot life is very easy there I
like Scandinavia yeah yeah it's very
nice yes good good good natured people
yes good saunas yeah everything yes and
sunshine at least in the summer in the
summer only
yeah any plans for the next couple of
years anything that um we should put on
the calendar make sure that we get in no
because I cannot plan that well I don't
plan I just me either maybe I inherited
it well I I just move I just move and
intuitive I'm very intuitive about these
things I suddenly see something in know
this Quantum stuff I don't know I
started hearing about it I talked to a
brilliant guy who was in my lab and said
hey J do what do you think about this
you said oh sounds interesting let's do
it and uh we're doing it I am lucky that
I get paid to do that but um no I don't
have plans like that I I I I would like
to um we would like I mean we would like
to organize our life a little bit
differently now that you know that we
have a summer house in Denmark and so on
I still plan to travel there I like
Europe a lot but I don't know if I can
live there I like Switzerland a lot I
want to go to Argentina every year and I
feel very close to my family
that's very important um we are all
going for an event there I hope that you
can join us if you can uh so those
things are very important to me but I no
I don't have plans for anything I I
don't know I i' like to be
surprised well Dad
I want to extend a a real sense of
gratitude from me from everyone
listening and watching although you may
argue that um they're not going to be
interested this has been our back and
forth over the last months as I've tried
to convince you to do this this podcast
I can assure you that um they were they
are uh very interested your story is a
really unique one and I can say that
both as your son but also as somebody
who's sat across from scientists from
all different you know domains and
backgrounds not just
neuroscientists um I also really
appreciate your ability to explain
complicated things in ways that at least
um we can start to get an understanding
because these are are these are hard
Concepts and you know I think what comes
through so clearly is that somehow
you've been able to grab these highlevel
really abstract Concepts and work with
them and try and understand them but
you've also been able to lead a life
where you're really grounded in the
day-to-day and in reality and I have to
say your wish for me and for Laura and I
assume for everyone else to be joyful
mhm um I'll work on that and also I must
say it just hit me like Square in the
face during this discussion that I get
such peace and I can really focus on
being joyful knowing that you're joyful
like it's so clear like you have a
joyful life at so many levels and that
you've pursued what you wanted to do
over and over and um and you know some
people may have tuned into this podcast
thinking that we were going to get into
our issues and things like that I'll
just briefly say that yeah we've had our
ups we've had our downs and we've um
certainly landed up and um much much
higher than we ever would had we not had
all of that um
and as I told you last year around this
time on your birthday when we all got
together to celebrate like we're not
just good we're we're Beyond good so
anything that comes up around that I
want to just go on record saying that
like that's water under the bridge and I
don't ever think about it all I think
think about are the incredible gifts
that you've given me about curiosity and
pursuing my curiosity about putting new
footprints on UNT tread beaches um the
early discussions around the excitement
that science can bring I mean I remember
all of it I really remember all of it
and and in immense detail and I love
your stories about scientists both um
how they soar and also how human they
are and how they're fallible like like
the rest of us so you know I there's not
a day that goes by where I don't thank
God because I do believe in God um that
you're my father that you and Mom
created me and Laura and that I've had
the life that I have and that I continue
to have the life that I have so I just
want to thank you for the example and
the nurturing and for coming here uh
there aren't words well thank you you
know how much I love you I I think that
these words are the biggest gift that I
I get and I think any father listening
to that to his son or daughter saying
that would also feel the same way or a
mother for that matter it's it's a very
fulfilling feeling you know to have that
notion that you you feel that you owe so
much to what you got uh and also the
fact that you've done incredibly well
and the kind of person you are yeah so I
wish you all the the wisdom that you
need in order to just go through life
the way you know you're going but I
think that is a it's nice to also that
we are sort of on the same wavelength on
many things in you I see more of a
reflection of what I always wanted to be
as well so that's easier in a way
perhaps it's because Fathers and Sons
have that so we certainly relate yes
well thank you thank you I love you I
love you too you know that thank you for
joining me for today's discussion with
Dr Bernardo huberman to learn more about
his work please see the links in the
show note captions if you're learning
from Andor enjoying this podcast please
subscribe to our YouTube channel that's
a terrific zeroc cost way to support us
in addition please follow the podcast on
both Spotify and apple and on both
Spotify and apple you can leave us up to
a five-star review please check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast if you
have questions or comments about the
podcast or guests or topics that you'd
like me to consider for the hubman Lab
podcast please put those in the comment
section on YouTube I do read all the
comments for those of you that haven't
heard I have a new book coming out it's
my very first book it's entitled
protocols an operating manual ual for
the human body this is a book that I've
been working on for more than 5 years
and that's based on more than 30 years
of research and experience and it covers
protocols for everything from sleep to
exercise to Stress Control protocols
related to focus and motivation and of
course I provide the scientific
substantiation for the protocols that
are included the book is now available
by pre-sale at protocols book.com there
you can find links to various vendors
you can pick the one that you like best
again the book is called protocols an
operating manual for the human body if
you're not already following me on
social media I am hubman lab on all
social media platforms so that's
Instagram X formerly known as Twitter
threads Facebook and Linkedin and on all
those platforms I discuss science and
science related tools some of which
overlaps with the content of the hubman
Lab podcast but much of which is
distinct from the content on the hubman
Lab podcast again that's hubman lab on
all social media platforms if you
haven't already subscribed to our neural
network newsletter our neural Network
newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly
newsletter that includes podcast
summaries as well as protocols in the
form of brief 1 to three-page PDFs those
one to three page PDFs cover things like
deliberate heat exposure deliberate cold
exposure we have a foundational Fitness
protocol we also have protocols for
optimizing your sleep dopamine and much
more again all available completely zero
cost simply go to huberman lab.com go to
the menu tab scroll down to newsletter
and provide your email we do not share
your email with anybody thank you once
again for joining me for today's
discussion with Dr Bernardo huberman and
last but certainly not least thank you
for your interest in science
[Music]