welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Craig
conver Dr Craig conver is a medical
doctor who did his training at Brown
University and Thomas Jefferson
University he is a world expert in what
he refers to as performance medicine
which involves the use of peptides and
other therapies for improving mental
health physical health and performance
now many of you have perhaps heard of
peptide therapies perhaps some of you
have not a peptide is simply a small
protein so insulin is a peptide we have
many different thousands of peptides in
our brain and body and they perform a
variety of different roles Dr conover's
expertise is in the use of exogenous
that is peptides that one takes
exogenous peptides for activating
multiple Pathways in the brain and body
to augment health now of course peptides
such as insulin have been used for many
years now to treat things like diabetes
but today we talk about novel peptides
including glp1 so these are glucagon
likee peptide analoges things like OIC
and monjaro which I realize are a bit
controversial however today we talk
about the micro doing of those peptides
we talk about those peptides combined
with other peptides as well as
behavioral practices to offset the
muscle loss associated with them and
then we dive into some lesser known
peptides but ones that are growing in in
use for instance bpc157 or body
protection compound 157 which is used to
treat inflammation to accelerate wound
healing and a variety of other things
then we discuss the use of peptides
specifically to increase growth hormone
secretion during sleep as well as some
peptides that can actually increase
rapid eye movement sleep dramatically
today we also discuss testosterone
therapies Not Just For Men but for women
these are growing increasingly popular
as well as things like NAD
as well as specific supplements Dr
Conover as he will soon tell you is not
a huge proponent of supplements but he
does mention several that he feels are
of particular use including things like
co-enzyme Q10 and some of the methylated
B vitamins and he explains why he takes
that stance so today's discussion is
really for anybody interested in mental
health physical health and performance
and the reason I say that is that even
if you aren't considering taking
peptides or already taking peptides
peptides and some of these other
compounds I've mentioned sit somewhere
between doing nothing except diet and
exercise supplements which I sort of see
is the next step up the ladder in terms
of augmenting your health approaches and
then of course there are a number of
prescription drugs including hormone
therapies such as growth hormone
therapies testosterone therapies and a
number of other things that yes can
modify those hormone Pathways they are
in fact hormones but they actually can
shut down one's natural production of
those hormone Pathways peptide therapies
sit somewhere between doing nothing and
supplementation and those more advanced
hormone therapies and that's why peptide
therapies I believe are growing in
popularity they can augment specific
hormone Pathways they can augment
specific in fact multiple processes
within the brain and body to augment
Health but they don't tend to operate in
that negative feedback cycle by shutting
down one's own endogenous production now
that doesn't mean that they aren't
without some safety concerns and today
we of course discuss the potential side
effects and safety concerns of peptides
as well as the critical issue of
sourcing clean peptides and working with
a board-certified physician if one is
going to pursue peptide use so by the
end of today's discussion you will be
right there on the Cutting Edge of
what's happening and where things are
going with peptides and in keeping with
that you'll notice that during today's
discussion we talk a fair amount about
what the FDA currently allows in terms
of prescription peptides what the FDA
has recently removed from the market in
terms of peptides and as a very recent
update just prior to the release of this
episode I learned that three peptides
cjc-1295
epom morelan both of which are in the
growth hormone secretagogue family
meaning they promote the release of
growth hormone as well as thymosin beta
Alpha which is in the sort of
anti-inflammatory and tissue repair
pathway those three are now reallowed
for prescription in the United States so
at the time of recording this episode we
discussed some of those as being
recently banned by the FDA they are now
approved again for use in humans by the
FDA so there's a brief and very recent
update so just to summarize this
admittedly long introduction today
you're going to learn about this
incredible area of science called
peptide biology and how it can augment
mental health physical health and
performance and you're going to do so
from one of the world's leading clinical
experts before you begin I'd like to
emphasize that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at
Stanford it is however part of my desire
and effort to bring zero cost to
Consumer information about science and
science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is ju ju makes
medical grade red light therapy devices
now if there's one thing that I have
consistently emphasized on this podcast
it is the incredible impact that light
can have on our biology now in addition
to sunlight red light and near infrared
light sources have been shown to have
positive effects on improving numerous
aspects of Cellar and organ Health
including faster Muscle Recovery
improved skin health and wound healing
improvements in acne reduced pain and
inflammation even mitochondrial function
and improving Vision itself what sets Tu
lights apart and why they're my
preferred red light therapy device is
that they use clinically proven
wavelengths meaning specific wavelengths
of red light and near infrared light in
combination to trigger the optimal
seller adaptations personally I use the
juv whole body panel about three to four
times a week and I use the juv handheld
light both at home and when I travel if
you'd like to try juv you can go to ju
spelled
jv.com huberman juv is offering an
exclusive discount to all hubman lab
listeners with up to $400 off ju
products again that's ju spelled
jv.com huberman to get up to $400 off
today's episode is also brought To Us by
betterhelp betterhelp offers
Professional Therapy with a licensed
therapist carried out entirely online
therapy is an extremely important
component to overall health in fact I
consider doing regular therapy just as
important as getting regular exercise
including cardiovascular exercise and
resistance training exercise now there
are essentially three things that great
therapy provides first it provides a
good rapport with somebody that you can
really trust and talk to about any and
all issues that concern you second of
all great therapy provides support in
the form of emotional support but also
directed Guidance the do and the not
todos and third expert therapy can help
you arrive at useful insights that you
would not have arrived at otherwise
insights that allow you to do better not
just in your emotional life in your
relationship life but also the
relationship to yourself and your
professional life and all sorts of
career goals with better help they make
it very easy to find an expert therapist
with whom you can really resonate with
and provide you with these three
benefits that I described also because
better help is carried out entirely
online it's very time efficient and easy
to fit into a busy schedule with no
commuting to a therapist's office or
sitting in a waiting room or looking for
a parking spot so if you'd like to try
better help go to to betterhelp.com
huberman to get 10% off your first month
again that's betterhelp.com
huberman and now for my discussion with
Dr Craig conver Dr Craig Conover welcome
thank you Andrew I appreciate the
invitation to be here I'm thrilled that
you're here we are going to launch
ourselves into the space that is called
pep tiddes yeah and it's a it's an
interesting space for sure because I
think um most people probably don't know
what a pepti is they should feel no
guilt or Shame about that I'm sure
you'll you'll tell us but this area of
medicine that people broadly refer to as
peptides is picking up a lot of momentum
even though it's been around for a long
time and I find it particularly
interesting because um there are many
people using peptides for very specific
purposes but most people haven't really
heard of the various peptides that are
out there right and and if anything we
can be sure that in the years to come
peptides are going to be increasingly
popular and totally agree and there's of
course the incredibly popular peptide of
glp1 Agonist um for sure taking over so
to drop into this um and make sure
everyone's on the same page uh what is a
peptide yeah I mean just from a very
Elementary level peptides are just
chains of amino acids so so amino acids
all naturally occurring molecules we
call it a peptide if it's 40 amino acids
or less call it a protein if it's 41
amino acids or more the body makes I
think last I read 300,000 peptides so
it's a massive number uh we've probably
therapeutically are using closer to 150
over the years which is obviously tiny
compared to that so to your point this
is blossoming we've been using peptides
for about 8 years a long time um but
still very early
in in our understanding of how best to
use peptides and how clinically we're
going to get the most out of them so
it's exciting maybe just to orient
ourselves we should talk about glp1
first um not because it's necessarily
the uh category of peptides that um I
think uh people would want to consider
for themselves um but because most
people have probably heard of uh
semaglutide and U monjaro and things
like that sure so um how long ago was it
that humans started injecting glp1
Agonist in order to lose weight I think
the weight loss aspect has only been a
couple years I mean it's been tremendous
how it's accelerated to like literally
becoming the number one prescribed in
America uh you know semi Glu OIC was
approved longer than that for four type
2 diabetics helping with you know
glucose control and helping with glucose
utilization
uh and what they found you know as a
side effect was that these people were
losing weight and then that word caught
on and you know what's interesting and I
don't think most people understand this
most of the medicines prescribed
particularly in America are prescribed
off label meaning they've never ever
been approved for what they're used so
is that right yeah the vast majority
yeah are never approved so as a
physician I'm allowed to prescribe any
drug for any reason I want as long as
it's been approved for something right
as long as we're safe right we don't
want to be cavaliere about this and
Renegade and do all these things that
are not that are out out of bounds but
that is the truth so that seml is a
great example being used for helping
people diabetics type two diabetics
lower their blood sugar and then it got
to well now let's help diabetics lose
weight right because diabetics struggle
with weight the insulin resistance and
then it became well even if you're not a
diabetic could you benefit from losing
weight well heck yeah right I mean look
at the amount of obesity and people who
are overweight and having trouble
maintaining healthy weight it's
exorbitant in this country and certainly
worldwide so then it spread it did
eventually get uh FDA approval
specifically for weight loss but you
know at first no it's been just for type
two diabetics to help with glucose
utilization and you know we've been
using primarily tepati which is like
semi glutide version 2.0 mostly for the
past two years have learned a tremendous
amount and my opinion's actually changed
from working with people yeah what is
your opinion my understanding is that um
well there's sort of two camps on this
it seems yeah at least two camps one
Camp seems really bullish on this um
they seem very excited about this drug
the other Camp seems to point to the
fact that one may be creating a drug
dependency um that it's very expensive
um and they point to the also potency of
Lifestyle factors like exercise and
caloric restriction um eating mostly
non-processed Foods Etc as a quote
unquote better alternative I'm not
necessarily saying that I think that
both have their place it's to me it
seems very contextual but as a clinician
I'm curious what you think yeah I I
agree both have their place um My
Philosophy is I want everyone have to
have access to things that are number
one safe that propel them to look feel
and perform their best and if that means
right if it was just about if I can
exercise my way out of this eat my way
out of this meaning lose weight change
my body composition why do we have an
epidemic you know of so many people who
struggle with that because it's really
hard right we don't totally understand
it I'm not saying that yeah the
processed food thing is a massive
problem you I mean I know that's come to
light recently with people pushing for
us to take a look at food companies and
the quality of our food which is amazing
but if people aren't interested in doing
better for themselves and you know this
is may not make sense but I think it
does the analogy I use is I like to help
people win the race first which then
helps them motivate to train for the
next race right and this kind of goes
against the grain of conventional
medicine which is you know if you want
to train for the race you have to you
know run a certain number of miles you
have to sleep a certain way you have to
eat a certain way you have to do all the
things struggle to get there right and
losing weight is a struggle and and the
way I look at if I can help people lose
weight first literally by using
something like tepati semaglutide and
I've seen this they're now excited I
mean I met with a client yesterday here
in Los Angeles and she literally looked
at me and said you've changed my life
she goes I am a super successful woman
in my company with my family with my
kids everything's great but now I love
my life my workouts are better I look
better my clothes fit better I am super
excited about waking up every morning
like she is there and that is what it's
about right and so for people if you can
help them achieve their goal first then
they're going to be motivated the light
bulb turns on they're going to be like
wow I want more of this and that's the
Ala moment that I love helping people
with so at first I was like oh we got to
be really cautious with this same
thinking like I don't want people to
lose too much weight like this is a
problem are they going to be dependent I
like the notion that you have to take
something the rest of your life and I'm
not saying it has to be the rest of your
life but when something works and as far
as I can tell it's very safe I think I
think it's worth discussing and I I like
people having those options at least
yeah it sounds like from the uh story
you just told us that it's not just
about um an aesthetic change that
motivates people to lean into other
aspects of their health and life when
they lose some weight that it's also
just the the sheer literal weight and
also that adapost tissue fat tissue you
know produces a lot of hormones that we
know impact the brain and um brain
function which is not to say that there
aren't people out there with a lot of
adapost tissues who aren't extremely
bright and motivated Etc but many people
who are carrying excess body fat don't
feel good they report brain fog Etc and
I think now thanks to Chris Palmer and
actually at Stanford there's also a
program in metabolic Psychiatry we're
starting to see um or understand and
appreciate the link between adapost
tissue and brain health or lack of brain
health in most cases sure so in the um
in the case of glp1 yeah um people have
criticized it saying that a fair
percentage of the weight uh that's lost
is lean body mass muscle loss but it
seems to me that can be remedied pretty
easily if people just do some resistance
training I I think part of that yeah
resistance train the other think I would
say is from what we've seen is when
people are using the conventional
dosages um they're losing weight too
quickly and so what we do is we get uh
both semaglutide mostly tepati
compounded and that allows us to use
basically micro dosages and start very
low in terms of dosage and go slowly
with people and what we found is as long
as people are losing less 2 lounds or
less a week they're not losing the
muscle mass we certainly encourage
adequate protein intake you know
resistance training but that micro doing
has been a GameChanger like literal Game
Changer because then people don't feel
like oh my and I've seen it where we
when we started people were losing you
know 15 pounds in three weeks goodness
right and then they're like excited but
then they're not cuz then they come off
of it and they just gain it right back
or they lose a lot of weight and they'
lose that fat in their face they look
like skeletons we've seen those called
OIC faces we don't like the way that
looks and that fat takes a while to come
back so if we just go slowly with this
and we can really dial it in and Nuance
it that has had a tremendous impact and
now beyond the weight loss you know
we're seeing cognitive benefits we're
seeing you know inflammation benefits a
lot of people with autoimmune disease
who their inflammation markers are
coming down and that's the only thing we
can think is working is that a direct
effect of
um OIC
on the immune system and Pathways
related to inflammation or is it
indirect through the loss of adapost
tissue body fat which then lowers uh
lowers inflammation great question or or
I could say is it the positive thoughts
that come from looking yourself in the
mirror and feeling good right which
transcends to you feeling better about
yourself and that feeds forward to the
momentum that you put forth in the world
all of those things I think it's all of
the above you know I think that's going
to be hard to dissect but it's real I
mean I have a patient she's 50 she has
Hashimoto thyroiditis meaning she
attacks her thyroid she doesn't you know
make enough thyroid hormones so she
takes thyroid hormone well one of the
challenges with that is they make a lot
of thyroid antibodies this antibody
called thyroid peroxidase antibody and
when you have an elevated thyroid proxy
andbody you don't feel good you feel
inflamed your joints hurt you get rashes
life is just not easy and it's a
challenge to get that number down I mean
certainly a challenge for me you know
you traditionally use probiotics a lot
of to help bolster the immune system
well now we're starting to use the gp1s
and we're seeing that those antibody
levels come down and I I don't have a
great way of explaining it but there's
something going on that's very positive
very interesting well I suppose moving
from uh most widely known um peptides
are still fairly unknown to most people
even the concept but that's why you're
here uh you're changing that right now
um but moving from things like gp1 to
what I would probably call the second
most popular peptide the one that we're
hearing more and more about all the time
um and that's bpc 157 body protection
compound 157 um which to my
understanding they're are a lot of
animal data very few if any clinical
studies on humans but a lot of people
now taking bpc in various forms yeah um
what are some known uses for bpc let's
just say within your clinic sure um and
then we'll get around to the fact that
bpc has let's hope temporarily been
taken off Market y um and what some of
the alternatives are but um what is bpc
what instances where people have you
found it useful for so many so I think
with bpc for me kind of the most
utilized peptide that we've used so we'd
like to use
bpc almost with every patient it is very
anti-inflammatory right and so just from
a very general perspective you know most
people walking around who are adults you
know they're stiff they're sore as they
get older they work out we work with uh
athletes of all levels there's that
element of inflammation maybe they have
some chronic disease diabetes heart
disease autoimmune disease inflammation
is Paramount we understand that and bpc
I you know observed with so many
patients we're talking thousands upon
thousands of patients where their
inflammation comes down so they feel
better they're not as stiff they're not
as store their knee doesn't hurt as much
their shoulder improved so we've learned
you know that we start with the dose you
know based upon these like you said
animal studies um which is conservative
make sure it's safe and then we've seen
over time that we can get to higher and
higher dosages and have even more of an
impact you know and I think so for
people understanding using bpc we
started with a dose of like 500
micrograms a day we got up to 5,000
micrograms a day you know U and we'd
like a protocol 5 days on two days off
and that's been very helpful for a
variety of things from post viral you
know with the pandemic had a lot of
success with bpc to again you name it
honestly almost everyone I could think
of particular as people are engaging
more Fitness related lives they're
working out more I would argue that
anyone who's working out on a regular
basis bpc is going to benefit it's going
to help you know improve the
inflammatory status but also help with
recovery and it doesn't seem to be one
of these agents that's going to be
detrimental like we we were talking
earlier Rob and I for the starter like
you know they found that people were
working out hard taking antioxidants
that there seems to be a negative
consequence to that because you don't
allow the body to kind of repair itself
I don't think that's happening with bpc
that's interesting because my
understanding is also that um part of
the specific and General Adaptation of
exercise is triggered by inflammation
yeah this is why indeed it is true that
doing ice bath or really cold water
immersion cold shower seems fine but
cold water imers ver in the you know 4
to 8 hours after resistance training can
limit some of the hypertrophy and
strength gains from resistance training
because what you're inducing when you
actually go into the gym is the that
leads to the hypertrophy and strength
training is an inflammation response
that triggers the compensation right or
um or the hyper compensation so um it's
interesting you're saying that
bpc by the way I must say this because
then uh forgive the editorial but that
is not to say that cold plunges and cold
immersion is bad it's just in the hours
following resistance training
specifically for hypertrophy and
strength training if those are your
goals probably best to do it outside of
that window other times has some
tremendous benefits be safe but there
okay back to the topic at hand forgive
me but this can set it can set off a a
complicated um storm of sorts if if I'm
not if I'm not Ultra clear about the
details um bpc157 strongly
anti-inflammatory yes my understanding
is it also May upregulate growth hormone
receptors it does right and so works
well if you're you know we'll get into
taking a growth hormone releasing
peptide it pairs very well with that
because then you're working both sides
of the equation meaning if you're using
a growth hormone releasing peptide like
semelin or ellin ghrp6 whatever you're
helping your pituitary put out more
growth hormone well if you combine it
with bpc which upregulates the growth
hormone receptor you make the process of
growth hormon binding more efficient so
you get more out of it then you can use
less of the growth hormon releasing
peptide with the same result got it yeah
BP c57 um comes in many different forms
or it used to when it was allow when it
was FDA uh not disallowed um so I could
imagine how the oral forms would allow
for a just general um anti-inflammatory
response it's a gut peptide so we don't
have to worry about it being destroyed
by the gut most peptides that go into
the gut are broken down and corre but
this peptide when it's naturally
occurring occurs in the gut so it
survives in the gut so if somebody body
is taking bpc157 orally through a
capsule or tablet form right um my guess
is that has a general anti-inflammation
response I think it can what we've
observed is it's more limited to the gut
so people with any sort of you know
gastrointestinal issue whether that's
inflammatory bow disease like Crohn's or
uler of colitis you know irritable bowel
you name it leaky gut I think oral bpc
is more effective there has it been
shown to be effective for those
conditions or have you observed that
clinically Ober that clinically but
interestingly I've observed a better
clinical response when people inject it
even for gastrointestinal related things
so I think injecting and then so people
injecting subq which is right under the
skin we use the tiniest of needles like
an insulin needle 30 or 31 gauge we're
talking super small um and so I know a
lot of people like I'm never injecting
is less painful than a um than a Texas
mosquito bite there you go super easy
once you do it once or twice it's really
easy and we we walk people how to do how
to do that but interestingly I we
started thinking okay if you've got
something going on in your gut you
should take oral PPC cuz it's going to
Target it right then and I found now if
we're injecting it actually works better
than the oral and uh and then they came
up what if I've got an elbow injury
should I inject it in my elbow and we
found actually don't it's going to work
systemically you can inject it in your
abdomen or your rear end you're still
going to get benefit in your elbow but
now you're going to get benefit in all
your joints all over your body
systemically how do you think that's
working and my understanding is bpc157
can initiate fiberblast migration some
of the cells that that make up the the
various connective tissues that um when
injured or sore other things can make us
injured or sore of course but when
injured or sore that they those need
repair um so it always was um perplexing
to me why one could put bpc 157 in such
a small volume Under the Skin you know
just a few uh centimeters off the belly
button and it would somehow um seek out
the the injury site in an elbow or an
Achilles and there all these wild
anecdotes Tales of you know lore of
let's just say uh there was this Olympic
Athlete not this last Olympics but the
previous Summer Olympics that had a torn
Achilles who came back a few weeks later
and everyone was and meddled people were
talking about you know took Podium um uh
that is and people were talking about
bpc 157 there was kind of this you know
and who knows that's just uh chatter and
fog as they say but um kind of wild the
idea that you could just inject
something systemically put it into the
systemic circulation into the
bloodstream and it would faret out the
location in which the injury took place
and initiate a recovery response but
we've seen it with not to get off top it
we've seen it with with stem cells so
they've taken stem cells they've tagged
them radiographically so you can see
them um in the study I read which I can
find for you someone had a wrist broken
wrist and they gave them intravenous
stem cells and 24 hours later when they
visualized radiographically those stem
cells had AGG at at the sight of the
fracture so there's a lot you know about
our bodies obviously we don't know
there's a kind of innate human like
design and intelligence which I believe
in um I see it because we we've done a
lot of IV Therapy over the years and you
you know it's interesting when you give
some something intravenously you're
getting in the bloodstream and you can
feel some of these different compounds
we're just talking about vitamins
working within seconds and it shows you
how quickly things circulate people
don't understand like how quickly we
move our circulation it's massively fast
if one has ever gone into the hospital
for a surgery and and got a a cold
saline infusion yeah you realize how
quickly it hits your your toes you know
they're putting it in at your elbow
almost instant yeah within a few seconds
it also uh makes one appreciate how
we're all generally a little bit
dehydrated when you start getting a real
proper saline infusion all of a sudden
you feel yourself come to life in a way
that oh this is what it feels like to
have just the right amount of salt in my
blam exactly so going back to bpc where
I think it shines is in these ligaments
and tendons right I think this is where
most of these injuries happen is where
muscle is connecting to the Bone um you
know and there's you know people you
know grow their muscle but we don't
stretch the tendons and ligaments well
and that's where we get pull sometimes
strain and Sprain and tearing and I
think that's where bpc shine that's
certainly where it's been studied in
animal studies and I know that because
we can inject it directly into tendons
which is unlike steroids we would never
inject steroids into a tendon you damage
the tendon bpc we mix with things like
PRP prf which is play Rich fiber and a
little bit different than PRP and you'll
get healing within days like it's
awesome wow super safe uh and it's
amazing for people bpc is definitely
shorthand for BBC 157 that is is
certainly in widespread use I have been
concerned just personally about um gray
Market sources that um contain
contaminants and the fact that
um many people are obtaining bpc 157 not
from a physician not from a compounded
Pharmacy but just kind of on quote
unquote on the internet sure uh you're a
physician um I'm guessing that until the
recent ban by the FDA you were able to
prescribe clean bpc as it were what's
the story with bpc now and maybe we
could talk about gray Market sure versus
um I think it's a great question you
know versus prescribed and made it a
compounding pharmacy versus uh
pharmaceutical company uh pharmaceutical
so um and then of course there's black
market but let's just leave that out um
you know there are people that are going
to tell you know tell you hey this is
bpc and sell it to you that's obviously
bad and dangerous well we see that with
the anabolic steroids right like so
anabolic steroids are in the Black
Market you can't really I mean there's
one anabolic steroid which is nandrolone
which is DECA which can be officially
prescribed we use it you can combine it
with testosterone all in the up and up
Totally Above table the rest things like
trend balone others you you can't get
them from a physici in fact you very
hard to get them from a reputable
website in the United States so as long
as we're we're here by understanding is
deadin and uh testosterone cypionate are
can be prescribed or testosterone and
Nate things like that by by physicians
that's that's because it's been FDA
approved for the treatment of various
things hypoc canatal syndromes corre uh
testosterone replacement therapy in both
men and women correct Etc so th those
categories of testosterone um like
compounds right um cypionate and anate
Etc and deadin which is basically like
is it similar to DHT is it uh a little
bit yeah I mean it's uh the generic name
is nandrolone yeah I mean it has the
flavor of helping with joints I think uh
it works synergistically with things
like testosterone different you know
whether it's testosterone cpen anate um
and and I like it for people who
particularly people who have been on
testosterone men been on testosterone
replacement for a long time which is
many men um they tend to get less out of
testosterone becomes less potent like
anything right if you use something for
a long time you're going to get less out
of it over time anything you expose
yourself to continually doesn't work as
well um and so you know like to make
this really real I had a patient who was
a uh in the uh Marines and served a
secret service for several uh white
houses and he had a lot of you know
osteoporosis
osteopenia you know bone loss and you
know this is where I learned about using
something like nerone because we combine
nerone with testosterone it changed his
life you know this guy in his 80s who
was had to use a cane who came back to
life who started you know becoming super
mobile and working out again and
synergistically I think it works really
well not to get too far off topic but
it's interesting and I think uh another
sort of brief editorial for me if I may
um you mentioned this patient was in
their 80s I think nowadays unfortunately
a lot of younger males in in particular
guys in their gosh even teens but 20s
and 30s even early 40s think that they
need to look to um synthetic
testosterones in order to uh look a
certain way um perform a certain way um
in the gym libido Etc and I I'll go on
record again and again and again saying
that it's absolutely not necessary for
most people of those ages provided that
they um are taking good care to sleep
well eat well take care now but I I
realize that there are a growing number
of use cases where people for whatever
reason aren't able to recover from
exercise they're struggling this a
little bit like the OIC conversation
right where that there are things that
can help move the needle in the right
direction pun intended um but here with
testosterones syn synthetic
testosterones in Deca there's a real
concern about loss of fertility totally
right I I think it brings up a larger
point which is and obviously unbiased
but I think it's super helpful for
people to have a physician help them in
this course particularly with
testosterone it is just known that
people get it from their trainers
they're Bros from the gym right who were
saying oh you got to use this I mean I
have so many patients who were started
using testosterone in their late teens
early 20s goodness yeah that's I mean
not goodness meaning Badness that does
not seem like a good idea still very
common like gracious still very common
and you know one in particular this is
probably 10 years ago came to see me
he's 25 he got married and to your point
he said I'm ready to have kids
I have zero sperm left right and that's
a real thing and so he had been using
and I would say abusing both
testosterone and growth hormone for
years now what he told me was and I get
it he was Superman he could wake up do a
hard workout you know crush it wake up
the next morning was not sore crush it
again and just kept going kept going it
was super fit super happy in that regard
and how he looked how he felt how he
performed but then he got to a point
where he's a little bit wiser mature and
he was like oh my goodness now there's a
repercussion for this and I've seen that
time and time again and the repercussion
is Big you're not making any sperm or
the sperm quality is super poor now what
do you do well now you got to come off
testost you got to rebuild your system
which we can do you know we can use
things like chopine en chopine HCG lots
of different agents to help in that
regard even certain peptides but I think
it brings up the large Point even
getting into peptides which is having a
physician who's knowledgeable to me is
super helpful the challenge for people
is they don't know where to get the
right information right and they're
getting it from websites and they're
getting it from people saying oh just
try this peptide and I've had lots of
people talking about the you know
websites or whatever not to name any
names who've had anaphylactic reactions
to research type peptides which are not
for human consumption and I'm not saying
that there's bad companies or whatever
you just got to be careful you got to be
selective at least right well what
brought us on to the uh conversation
about testosterone was this black market
issue there's also what I would call
this um dark dark gray Market issue
which is that there are a number of
companies that will sell all sorts of
things but peptides in particular sure
and listed on their website it'll say
not for human or animal consumption for
research purposes only right and one of
the major issues is that the um potency
and cleanliness so to speak of Purity
yes of those um compounds is not
established um and many of them have LPS
Lippy polysaccharide in them which is
inflammatory and earlier before we
started recording you mentioned
um that you have heard of or interacted
with not your patients but people who
have come to you saying that they had
like really serious life-threatening um
consequences for using these black
market certainly but um dark gray Market
uh peptides yeah and so to to tell the
story story further is back in October
of 2023 the FDA uh put many peptides bpc
and we can name them out on what's
called a category 2 list meaning they
are no longer allowed to be compounded
right now that excludes then research
companies who are not under the purview
of the FDA but these compounding
pharmacies it's been a huge blow because
they've been told they cannot use these
agents and the compounding pharmacies
are distinct from these other um black
and dark gray um sources um in that they
actually can establish Purity they are
designed to be injected into humans and
they have a totally different standard
right so they and I think it's confusing
for people when they hear compounding
pharmacy they thought friend they're not
friende they're FDA regulator they're
Board of Pharmacy regulated in every
state they are monitored they are
inspected all the time I've worked with
compounding pharmacies my whole career
which is going on you know close to 25
years now just like anything there's
some amazing compounding pharmacies and
there's some not so amazing compounding
pharmacies which cut Corners the ones we
work with don't cut any corners and I
know that because they're inspected all
the time right and it's a big deal to
them and they want to do it right with
Purity with processing and making sure
that anything they make especially a
sterile compound which is going to be
anything injected you know eye drops
things you inject in yourself whether
it's IV subq or intramuscular they're
considered sterile um they have to then
be tested by an outside lab to make sure
Purity make sure that there's no
endotoxins things like that it's it's
highly regulated and it's a big deal for
them and it's a big deal for the
Physicians who you know prescribe with
them which I appreciate because the
advantage of a compounding pharmacy is
we can tweak the dosage we don't have to
use a standard set dosage we can combine
things synergistically to get you know 1
plus 1 doesn't equal two now it equals
four and that to me is a huge Advantage
just like we were talking about the gp1
semaglutide and tpdes we get those
compounded so that you know we have a a
the compounding pharmacy we're using now
we're making a unique combination of
tepati and saralin right which will
address some of this muscle loss that
people are getting so we can combine to
stimulate growth hormone release offset
some of the muscle loss from exactly
toeside yeah yeah and and so you can do
things like that with a compounding
pharmacy but again just to make sure
people understand compounding pharmacies
are highly regulated highly regulated um
again there's always going to be bad
apples but uh you know Physicians who
know how to work with compounding
pharmacies I think provide access to
things that these conventional both
Pharmaceuticals and conventional
pharmacies can't I'd like to take a
quick break and acknowledge our sponsor
ag1 ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic
drink that also includes prebiotics and
adaptogens ag1 is designed to cover all
of your foundational nutritional needs
and it tastes great now I've been
drinking ag1 since 2012 and I started
doing that at a time when my budget for
supplements was really Limited in fact I
only had enough money back then to
purchase one supplement and I'm so glad
that I made that supplement ag1 the
reason for that is even though I strive
to eat most of my foods from Whole Foods
and minimally processed foods it's very
difficult for me to get enough fruits
vegetables vitamins and minerals
micronutrients and adaptogens from food
alone and I need to do that in order to
ensure that I have enough energy
throughout the day I sleep well at night
and keep my immune system strong but
when I take ag1 daily I find that all
aspects of my health my physical health
my mental health and my performance both
cognitive and physical are better I know
that because I've had lapses when I
didn't take ag1 and I certainly felt the
difference I also notice and this makes
perfect sense given the relationship
between the gut microbiome and the brain
that when I regularly take ag1 which for
me means a serving in the morning or
midm morning and again later in the
afternoon or evening that I have more
mental Clarity and more mental energy if
you'd like to try ag1 you can go to
drink a1.com huberman to claim a special
offer right now they're giving away five
free travel packs and a year supply of
vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com
huberman to claim that special offer so
is it fair to say that if one is
interested in exploring the use of
peptides for what you refer to as
performance medicine
um mental physical health and
performance yes um Falls underneath that
to essentially
only put peptides into their body um
maybe even on their body surface that
they're obtaining from a physician who's
obtained the peptides from a compounding
pharmacy yeah and who's developing a
relationship so we for any peptide that
we use we meet with the patient we make
sure they're a good fit we make sure
that there's no contraindications we
also can recommend and specifically dial
it up or down whatever it is come up
with this is what we think you should
use based upon your life experience the
medicines you're taking are not taking
the conditions you're treating or not
treating right I think that's really
important again I'm biased being a
physician my whole goal is to get to
know patients that's why I'm here is to
kind of walk that walk and help people
in that regard and you know if someone's
out there on the internet doing it
themselves they're they're walking in
you know kind of you know on their own
and so you know not to make it like
everything bad is going to happen but
when you're when you have the help of
someone who has experience that goes a
long way I think particularly with
something like this yeah I agree and um
and it worries me very much that people
are buying PPC from um gray Mark dark
gray Market or uh uh Black Market
sources I mean anything that says on it
not for animal or human use for research
purposes only you can pretty much
guarantee the endotoxin the lipip
polysaccharide at least has not been
removed and that could be really atic
especially since my understanding is
that that can be cumulative over time
it's not that one injection causes
somebody to go into anaphylactic shock
it's that some of this LPS can build up
an inflammatory response over time and
then you don't know where the Tipping
Point is and then somebody can have a
really terrible reaction well and then
taking a step further you know getting
away from just peptides but any I
remember this was I don't know 15 years
ago someone was taking advice from a
very famous doctor on TV about taking an
oral compound to lose weight and they
called me up and they said H I'm having
terrible headaches terrible headaches
for days they came in their blood
pressure was through the roof you know
like I don't remember the specific
numbers but let's just say 220 over 140
and normally it's 120 over 80 well did
you take anything different yeah this
doctor recommended I take this weight
loss compound right so the problem is
people have access to all this
information but if they're not under the
guidance of a doctor to help clean up
the mess and we clean up the mess not
that there's always mess but this is
what we enjoy doing you know is as a
physician like we've seen the darkest of
dark you know we're able to help people
when things don't go perfectly planned
and uh I think that's a big deal you
know particularly when there's lots of
these tools and they're exciting tools
and they're great tools and um
fortunately for me I've been in this
space longer than most that I've just
you know built up a large repertoire of
experience of observing people and
working with people and seeing we got to
tweak this we got to Nuance this or
sometimes we don't ever want to use this
again yeah this is not for most people
so given that bpc 157 has been
effectively removed from the um
legitimate Market uh what are people's
Alternatives again uh working with the
the uh caveat that um people should work
with a physician yeah um where can
Physicians get something similar enough
to bpc 157 so there's a new compound
newer uh peptide called uh the shortened
for PDA pentad DEA arginate it's
basically the same molecular structure
as bpc except they've swapped out an
acetate for arginate one amino acid
substitution corre one amino acid
substitution um and so we're using that
and having really good results um I
certainly it's early in the game of
using PDA but it seems very close to bpc
in the clinical responses we're getting
from our patients who are reporting back
decrease in inflammation all these
wonderful things that we used to see
with BP C so and I and I think uh I
surmise that this is going how it's
going to be with all of these peptides
right because again peptides are just
chains of amino acids you know certainly
a lot of people smarter than me trying
to figure out how do we then create
other types of amino acid combinations
you know I.E peptides that do similar
actions to bpc to thymus and Alpha to
epimone to tb500 on and on and on so I'm
hopeful in that regard um and I and I
also you know some of my patients work
at the very highest level of the US
government they are well aware of this
and who have assured me they're going to
look at this that this is serious you
know because they're they've been using
peptides and they're concerned that oh
my goodness the FDA came in and changed
the game very it's been a huge setback
for all of us I definitely want to
Circle back as to what the motivation
was by the FDA for doing that um at some
point I think um in the meantime however
I think um there's a lot of interest in
BBC 157 a lot of use of bpc157 the
sources of bpc157 are now drying up Y
and that's why I'm personally concerned
that people are going to start going to
the dark gray market and black market
I'm excited about the uh pentad DEA
arginate yes um so let's put that on
people's um ear map um brain map pentad
DEA arginate may be a good uh physici
prescribed substitution for people that
can benefit from bpc157 and a good
starting dose so to make it really clear
for people helpful 250 micrograms to 500
micrograms we're using 500 micrograms
injected daily again we like Monday
through Friday take the weekends off
that's a good dosing schedule we'll
we'll see how that goes we probably can
use larger dosages that's conservative
um but that's a good starting point for
people and thus far you haven't
mentioned any side effects of bpc 157 or
pentad dea arginate it's that's kind of
remarkable it's been tremendous yeah and
we were using bpc intravenously as well
you know patients would come in and you
know oh tweaked my knee tore my ACL tore
my you know meniscus whatever um you can
give them bpc essentially as a bolus
intravenously my goodness that made a
difference now that using something
intravenously from the pharmacokinetic
standpoint it's not going to last in the
system very more it's more of a spark
whereas if you use an agent
subcutaneously you're going to get more
of a long lasting you know again not
terribly long-lasting with peptides but
longer than using something
intravenously kind of The Sweet Spot was
C certainly using both we could use
something as a spark to initiate that
anti-inflammatory Cascade then follow up
with a subcutaneous dose yeah and even
though earlier we were talking a little
bit about um some hormone replacement
therapies um before that off microphone
um you mentioned that you prefer
peptides to direct hormone manipulations
in most cases so I think um while
peptides can be hormones there are
things like uh um uh oxytocin is
sometimes called a peptide
in people think about hormone therapies
thinking testosterone estrogen prone uh
you know thyroid Etc it it sounds to me
like much of your practice is built up
around the the notion that there are
things that one can use peptides to kind
of um push and pull on these various
systems without getting into them
directly my understanding is the
advantage of that is you don't get the
negative feedback you don't gain the
shutting down of natural production yeah
you know and testosterone is a great
example um um because like we were
saying I don't ever want to manipulate
hormones you know growth hormon is
another example I don't ever want to
manipulate that meaning you know
providing it to people more than they
would get in nature this is why I
actually don't a little bit off topic
like when people use testosterone
pellets or any sort of pellet therapy
because you're exposing people to a
concentration of hormones we would never
ever see in nature I would prefer people
inject it where you're going to get some
variation in dose on a day-to-day basis
which we're humans so we do get some day
day to-day variation or topically or
under the tongue or something um peptid
same thing I don't want to manipulate
the hormones right I want to just stick
within kind of the the highways or the
lanes swim lanes for how they should
operate and and then take advantage of
that and that's been a safe way to do it
as opposed to and I've seen it you know
talking about another peptide which is
eper marelin a growth hormon releasing
peptide uh eper marelin you inject Under
the Skin travels up to the pituitary the
posterior pituitary in the brain which
is respons we're putting out growth
hormone that growth hormone then leaves
the pituitary enters the bloodstream
travels to the liver where we make
insulin like growth factor one which
then enters the circulation is very
anabolic meaning growth healing mending
you know as we get older we make less
growth hormone as we get older we wear
down obviously we get you know
degenerative conditions part of that uh
I don't know what part it for everyone's
a little bit different is because of our
hormonal Decline and so when you can
give something like epin and we can talk
about others you're actually helping not
only push out a little bit of growth
hormone for people but you're directing
when you push it out right we we think
so why it's important for people to be
asleep by 10 p.m. between 10: p.m. and
2: a.m. because you think that's the B
largest pulse of growth hormone during
the 24-hour period is that right it so
I've um long wondered whether or not the
um the tale I was told when I was
growing up which is that every hour
before midnight is worth two hours of
sleep post midnight um that feels true
to me um then again feels true as as
often misleading but feels true to me um
but it makes perfect sense if the the
largest pulse and growth hormone is
occurring in the in the couple of hours
before midnight yeah I mean that's
that's how I learned it um I agree with
you it feels true to me as well um but
taking advantage then of you know
injecting something like I morelan at
bedtime then you're going to you know
within a few minutes and with I morelan
it's interesting because people will get
a little flushing tingling at times um
and what I've seen with the point of
making is uh there are some Physicians
and some pharmacies which you know the
the dosage of velin and most of these
growth home releasing peptides should be
100 micrograms that's the max dose uh
for to bind the receptor and you know
what I've seen is with eelin rare but
some people do get Anil axis and it's
happened and I think that happens when
people are pushing it and giving more
than they should and I've heard of that
they're giving 200 300 400 micrograms at
a time which is a big dose now what
they're getting is the client the
patient is like oh my gosh I feel this
amazing flushing it must be working but
then you could spiral into oh my
goodness I don't feel good so good in
your you know circulation system
collapsing so yeah using side effects as
a as a uh indicator of whether or not
something's working just seems like a
terrible idea but um it's very common
you know um I tend to be very
conservative about these things and by
the way um I've tried various peptides
for short periods of time because I like
to experiment um very safely um and some
things like surel and we'll talk about
other growth hormones secretagogues uh
for me uh for whatever reason you know
gave me great sleep but only in the
first part of the night it nuked my
rapid eye movement sleep in the second
half of the night it um spiked my
prostate specific antigen it was a very
consistent effect I came off it and it
went back down and it went back on it it
went back up and so I just found I
couldn't take it and it didn't take me
very long to figure that out but I know
that there are some people who love Sur
morelan and don't see any of the same
issues so it seems like it can be very
idual I agree with that I agree with
that and that's why I think it's again
helpful to work with a physician who has
experience who can kind of you know I
think of these peptides as having
flavors particularly the growth hormone
releasing peptides iiron very clean you
know as long as you stay within 100
micrograms or less people are going to
lean out a little bit sleep a little bit
better there's no no real side effects
they take it pre- sleep pre- sleep at
bedtime without carbohydrates ingested
in the previous two hours correct yeah
or 45 minutes technically yeah but
that's right and then there's saying
like growth hormone releasing peptide 6
ghrp6 which is also going to bind so I
think of iin being the most specific for
the growth hormone receptor but the
weakest so when you inject it you will
get growth hormone to come out an only
growth hormone but it's not going to be
a big burst of growth hormone you inject
ghrp6 now you may bind some prolactin
now you may bind some ACT which is going
to have your adrenals put out cortisol
now you're going to get a hunger
response right and maybe even have
trouble sleeping if you're getting may
have trouble sleeping but where where
that's beneficial before is if you're
looking to put on mass or get strong
ghrp6 is your go-to right because you
will increase your appetite and if
you're smart you'll eat a lot more
protein you know and and the building of
muscle is not necessarily complicated
right it's resistance training
sufficient protein which is where I
think most people fall off and then
having some anabolic kind of hormone in
the background like growth hormone or
testosterone are both helps that process
that's where ghrp6 can shine I mean
within weeks people will get big and
strong increase their press whatever
stuff flat out works but you got to know
how to use it and and understand the
flavor so the point of making is these
different peptides have different
flavors and to your point there's
individual responses that's that can be
a good thing I think for most of our
audience um the interest in growth
hormon SEC creogs probably relates to
the better sleep and the overall
feelings of Vitality and probably uh
most people are seeking to not Spike
their appetite or put on muscle really
these days we're hearing more and more
from people both and women who want to
be strong without being big yeah and
they prefer to be lean as opposed to not
lean which I think is a great goal
frankly that's my goal at this stage of
life I just turned 49 yesterday and I oh
thank you thank you yeah thanks for
coming out to the the birthday oh yeah
that was a lot of fun mini bash the
other day that was a lot of fun um you
know I I yeah I want to be strong and
capable I also want to be able to run
and have cardiovascular fitness but I
don't want to be large I don't want to
take up a lot of space I'm not
interested in taking up a lot oface
space um and I think most people fall
into that category so if ghrp6 can Spike
appetite which for a subset of people
might be useful um but probably most
people will want to avoid it epom
morelan I've always been calling it
ipamorelin but epom morelan at 100
micrograms um dosage or less perite
sounds like it's an interesting tool
what are some of the other growth
hormone secretagogues and I should just
brief I'll I'll take the liberty of
defining the these are peptides that
stimulate the release of your own
endogenous growth hormone this is not
taking growth hormone right yeah yeah um
two other main ones that we use one
would be
tesalan U which is similar to saralin
and that it also is going to work on the
growth hormone releasing hormone aspect
a little bit higher up in the you know
chain of how these hormones are released
so both searon and tesone um you you
don't necessarily need to add anything
else to it classically with ion hexone
ghrp6 we would add this other compound
cjc-1295
which is going to work on the ghrh which
allows the peptide and then the growth
hormone to stay in your system a little
bit longer the growth hormone releasing
hormon correct yeah but we can almost
set aside CJC now because CJC 129 the
FDA just came in and uh one let's just
say one acronym took out another there
go the FDA took out CJC okay nbpc nbpc
um people are probably getting a little
dizzy with these acronyms but I think
we're were uh doing a good job of
guiding people uh uh along so
cellin um and tesamorelin are similar
enough similar in that regard testelin
again talking about flavors testelin
works on visceral fat reduction so fat
around the organs and it's been FDA
approved for that purpose yeah with HIV
patients having this lipodystrophy which
is you know you know abnormal
accumulation of fat in particular
visceral fat around organs so testelin
works well for that my observation from
using it for with lots and lots of
people seems to work better in females
than males or does it get lead to this
um feeling of enhanced sleep as well
yeah so I think any of the growth
hormone releasing peptides anytime
you're going to make growth hormone more
active in your world that's how I think
about it better sleep better skin tone
texture right you're more resilient I
think growth hormone is a resiliency
hormone durability you know people find
that oh I do a hard workout but it takes
me days to recover I sprain my ankle
takes me a week to recover I cut my skin
takes me forever to heal they've got a
durability issue and that's how I think
about where growth hormone can shine not
that you got to go all the way to growth
hormone but these peptides can be a
really nice push and this is taken
before sleep no food within 45 minutes
of the of the injection and then what
and then the kind of the magic and what
we do is you know when we first started
about 8 years ago we'd use one peptide
at a time and then what we learned is
let's combine these peptides let's stack
peptides and that's how we do it add
lower dosages sometimes lower dosages um
but for example we had a great
combination BP PC epin and testelin all
together um taking at bedtime and you're
going to get subcutaneous fat reduction
from the EP maralin visceral fat
reduction from the test maralin uppr
regulation of the growth hormone
receptor from the bpc it was a wonderful
peptide we we kind of labeled it as a
fat loss peptide but people would put on
lean muscle mass they'd sleep better
their skin would be better they'd be
more durable their thought process would
be better awesome stuff and and that's
where I think that's where we enjoy it
is stacking these peptides together so
it's not again just one peptide at a
time but able to do it and that's why
again working with a compounding
pharmacy we can put these together so
you're only doing one shot a day you may
be doing three to seven peptides but
it's still one shot got it and um if one
is combining A tes morelan or Sur
morelan uh epom morelan and well not bpc
anymore but Penta arginate instead
because you can't get bpc 157 compounded
um is that done every night 5 days a
week
three days a week what's the rationale
of this 5 days on two days off five days
on two days off I came up with because
of how we would dose growth hormone so
the traditional growth hormone dosing
cycle would be 5 days on two days off
taking at bedtime yeah and that's where
it came up and then I I personally with
patients and myself I like to take
breaks so even with supplements I won't
take them on the weekends right because
I think you we you know again anything
you expose yourself to on a regular
basis is going to decrease the potency
we see that with exercise we see that
with food if you're eating the same food
every day it seems to become less
valuable for you right like change it up
like we we have to you know throw on the
crazy switch every now and then but
change it up and so then you're going to
make it more potent for you I do the
same thing with supplements so that you
know just resonates with me with people
to take a break from stuff I'd like to
take a quick break and thank one of our
sponsors function I recently became a
function member after searching for the
most comprehensive approach to lab
testing while I've long been a fan of
blood testing I really wanted to find a
more in-depth program for analyzing
blood urine and saliva to get a full
picture of my heart health my hormone
status my immune system regulation my
metabolic function my vitamin and
mineral status and other critical areas
of my overall health and vitality
function not only provides testing of
over 100 biomarkers key to physical and
mental health but it also analyzes these
results and provides insights from Top
Doctors on your results for example in
one of my first tests with function I
learned that had two high levels of
mercury in my blood this was totally
surprising to me I had no idea prior to
taking the test function not only helped
me detect this but offered medical
doctor informed insights on how to best
reduce those mercury levels which
included limiting my tuna consumption
because I'd been eating a lot of tuna
while also making an effort to eat more
leafy greens and supplementing with
Knack and acetal cysteine both of which
can support glutathione production and
detoxification and worked to reduce my
mercury levels comprehensive lab testing
like this is so important for health and
while I've been doing it for years I've
always found it to be overly complicated
and expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the tests done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function health.com huberman function
currently has a weight list of over
250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to hubman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to function
today's episode is also brought To Us by
eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart
mattress covers with cooling Heating and
sleep tracking capacity now I've spoken
many times before on this podcast about
the critical need for us to get adequate
amounts of quality sleep each night
that's truly the foundation of all
mental health physical health and
performance and one of the best ways to
ensure that you get a great night's
sleep is to control the temperature of
your sleeping environment and that's
because in order to fall and stay deep
asleep your body temperature actually
has to drop by about 1 to 3° and in
order to wake up feeling refreshed and
energized your body temperature actually
has to increase about 1 to 3° eight
sleep makes it incredibly easy to
control the temperature of your sleeping
environment by allowing you to control
the temperature of your mattress cover
at the beginning middle and end of the
night I've been sleeping on an eight
Sleep mattress cover for nearly 4 years
now and it has completely transformed
and improved the quality of my sleep
eight sleep has now launched their
newest generation of the Pod cover the
Pod 4 ultra the Pod 4 ultra has improved
cooling and heating capacity higher
Fidelity sleep tracking technology and
even has snoring detection that will
automatically lift your head a few
degrees to improve your air flow and
stop your snoring if you'd like to try
an eights Sleep mattress cover go to
8sleep.com
huberman to save up to $350 off their
pod 4 ultra eight sleep currently ships
in the USA Canada UK select countries in
the EU and Australia again that's
8sleep.com
huberman before we start recording uh
you mentioned that you're actually not a
huge fan of taking massive amounts of
supplements that you are a big fan of
taking CoQ10 coin Q10 200 milligrams per
day in the morning I also take CoQ10 um
I think I I started taking it for uh
quote unquote General mitochondrial
health I don't know that I thought very
carefully about exactly what I was
trying to accomplish with it um but what
what is the rationale of taking CoQ10 so
if I can break it down try to keep it
simple if we people are familiar with
the mitochondria it's the battery of the
cell these little organel inside each
cell um and they're responsible for you
know doing many things but primarily
making ATP chemical energy and so how do
we make energy well there's three main
ways the body uses it right or makes it
first is glycolysis we take glucose
which is a six carbon molecule we break
it in half to make two pyruvates right
that when we do that we make a little
bit of ATP that pyruvate then is
converted to something called a cetal
COA we run that through the kreb cycle
where we're also making ATP but we then
we're making these intermediate products
one of those intermediate products and
the main one is something called nadh
that nadh is then shuttled to the
mitochondrial membrane for you know this
is the magic where we make the most ATP
and there's five different hubs or we
call cytochromes right and this is how I
think about it because I just like to
simplify cytochrome one is where we use
NAD and um what the what the different
hubs are doing is we're exchanging
electrons for protons and that's a kind
of an electrical process we're
exchanging electrons for protons going
down an assembly line to eventually turn
this wheel the ATP wheel to make ATP the
way I understand it is the five
different hubs different nutrients hit
them so cytochrome 1 is NAD cytochrome 2
is ribo flave and vitamin B2 and
succinic acid cytochrome 3 is CoQ10
vitamin K2 cytochrome 4 is methylene
blue which we can talk about and then
cytochrome 5 are things like magnesium
vitamin A and copper so if you're
thinking about mitochondrial Health if
you include any or better all of those
you're going to maximize how your
mitochondria can work and make energy
it's the strongest way to do it and it's
again not necessarily complicated so
when I think of cq1 and again we use a
lot of NAD which we can talk about where
I think most people the the traffic
congestion happens on cyto Chrome one
right and so when we give people
upregulate their NAD production it's
essentially we're allowing for more
electron flow at cytochrome 1 which has
a downstream effect on the other
cytochromes so the traffic jam opens up
and now you can move electrons to
exchange for protons and make way more
ATP and if you're and but that's not
true for everyone and so some people it
could be at cytochrom 3 with CoQ10 it
could be at cytochrome 2 a lot of people
at cytochrome 4 which is again
cytochrome we call it cytochrom C
oxidase which where methylene blue binds
but that's just a simplistic view we
just people we run into traffic jams
right these electron flow gets stuck
we're just trying to open up the traffic
jam
so 200 milligrams a day of co-enzyme Q10
can be um Can facilitate some of that Cy
for sure and cyan's been studied very
safe up to 2400 milligrams a day no
harmful yep no harmful effects sometimes
I'll take more like I was telling you
earlier it's been dramatic for me with
migraine headaches and you basically
reducing them to zero you know as people
are hearing this they're probably
thinking okay well these are just you
know this is what I call anic data or
whatever I I you know I don't have to
remind people that you're a board
certified physician I think that what
was what still ringing in the back of my
mind this entire conversation even
though I'm paying very careful attention
is that most of the drugs that are
prescribed in this country are off label
I think that just like I I don't think
I've ever heard that stated out loud
yeah it's wild yeah yeah right so the
idea that people would take something
that wasn't um shown in a uh clinical
trial to be effective for purpose a um
that they would but it gets that it gets
approved for purpose a but then can be
prescribed by doctors for purpose B C D
or E I mean you're not telling me this
is common place you're telling me this
is the majority of prescription drug but
it makes sense if you think about it
right so if you took an antibiotic right
like we can just an antibiotic is going
to be very specific what it gets
approved for in terms of like working
against a specific bacteria but then
through clinical use and just experience
you know we learn that oh I can use
doxycycl or zpac aiyin or whatever it is
for a variety of bacterial infections
that extend well beyond just with a
proof for well that makes sense and and
does that ever cycle back to the uh
clinical trials or no this just becomes
physician understanding and lower like
hey yeah you know I've got patients that
you know they get on on aiyin and their
their acne clears up by the way I'm not
saying that folks I'm not a physician
but um but for instance exactly what
happened with semaglutide and OIC right
approved for helping glucose utilization
or lowering you know blood glucose in
patients with type 2 diabetes and they
found through use only people were
losing weight and now it's become
Blockbuster and it's and we see it with
you know things like you know
repurposing drugs for cancer right
there's there's there's a lot of that
going on a lot of the repurposing so you
know doxy cycl is a very common one
that's used in cancer therapies I think
by sophisticated oncologists I don't
treat cancer but by sophisticated
oncologists to use things like
doxycyclin metformin mendol which is an
antiparasitic drug right um to help with
cancer that's amazing so interesting it
is amazing I think also um you know I'm
I'm reminded that
um you know medicine as beautiful a uh
field as it is I have tremendous respect
for it um of course uh is a field of of
Fairly siloed training um and I love the
idea that now thanks to public education
efforts like this one um that you're
providing us that Physicians learn from
each other in a much broader way and can
potentially hear about what drugs can be
useful for this or that the other thing
um and this is not editorial this is
this is a real uh uh
observation pharmaceutical companies are
very interested in the other uses of
already approved drugs sure the research
and development process for a drug the
safety uh evaluation is incredibly
expensive so they want nothing more than
to take a drug that's already been
approved for one purpose and to take
that already safety approved drug and
find other use say how are they not
circling back to the off label uh use
and understanding of these compounds and
um and then essentially marketing them
for these other purposes or I guess with
OIC that's exactly what happened that's
what happened with OIC I mean it's again
I I write prescriptions and I think
there's a time in place I think it's
challenging for me though right and I
think for a lot of Physicians it's
become challenging operating in a
paradigm um when we talk about chronic
disease which is essentially failing I
mean and we all know this statistically
we're not making huge dents in heart
disease cancer autoimmune disease neurod
degener we're not at all but we're
spending exorbitant amounts of money
right um and this is you know something
that I had to learn over time and and I
don't know how I got into it but when I
started my practice back in 2006 I
started it was a traditional Family
Medicine practice but I started using
these nutritional IVs and this is before
hangover IVs this before was popular
this is you know 20 years ago and what I
learned was that these nutritional IBS
help people feel better quickly and I
developed this model for my patients
which I think is a better model which is
I want to help people feel better first
like we were talking about earlier in
this podcast because if I can get people
to feel better what what we learned
through Co and honestly what I want to
say to you Andrew which is really true
your podcast and what you do has been so
successful at a time during the pandemic
when people lost so much trust in people
like me right people lost that trust of
what do I do you know my how this is a
scary time I don't know what's going on
and you guys come along you in
particular providing this very stable
vetted information that people can trust
and have a starting point be like this
is what I want to do because Health one
of the gifts of Co was it put our health
on the Forefront of most people's mind
and life and and so what you're doing is
tremendous work and I can tell you
personally no literally like as a
physician I am just it's it's such an
honor to be here and to to talk to you
because every day every day my patients
come to me and said I heard this on the
huberman Lab podcast what do you think
of it and and I am not joking and I love
that I think it is awesome because
people one taking their health seriously
but two they have a stable resource that
they can trust the problem with
Physicians and and I'll tie this back in
is Physicians are hard to trust right
and it's this paternalistic model which
is and that's how I I was trained which
is you know you're going to do this
because I'm going to tell you to do it
right and I remember being in medical
school which was in the 99s and I can't
remember the exact specifics of the
study but they would go they did a study
where they colle collected the trash
outside of Physicians offices found that
greater than 30% of prescriptions
written that day were run away greater
than 30% wow and what and I remember
learning that and I was like what is
going on by the patients correct like
you came to the doctor because you
wanted a prescription right no you came
to the doctor because you weren't
feeling good you came to the doctor
because you wanted to be listened to you
came to the doctor because you wanted to
be validated and most of the time and
this still happens to today the vast
majority of doctors will just write you
a prescription or they'll write you two
prescriptions and that's not what most
people want sometimes it is and I do it
and sometimes it is but there are so
many other tools that we can use and so
when I help people feel better first
what i' why I've been successful and I
work with you know the the peak you know
people on this planet whether the
athletes the best athletes celebrities
the royal family you name it I'm so
privileged it's because they trust me
and that trust is really important I
take that really seriously you know what
I mean and so you know tying it back in
is we've lost a lot of that with the
pandemic it's actually come to the
Forefront and so that's why I want to
help people feel better first you know
the traditional model of medicine is is
get a diagnosis write a prescription if
that prescription doesn't work write
another prescription and so yes there
there's a time in place for that but
there's also a time in place for just
helping people it only works when people
value themselves enough like we're
talking I can tie this back to weight
loss right why do people have such
trouble losing weight I would argue that
most people don't value themselves
enough to actually care enough to make
the hard disciplinary choices in their
life to get away from emotionally eating
you know what I mean to do the right
things that they actually it's going to
be a struggle to get the right food for
themselves get away from processed foods
to be disciplined to go to the gym on a
regular
basis they don't have the right people
that they trust this is where you've
been such a gift tremendous gift well
thank you for the kind words I mean the
the um the birth of the podcast did take
place during the pandemic and um in
large part because I saw everybody
getting very anxious their circadian
rhythms disrupted and um those were
focuses of my laboratory and and frankly
when I was a postto and graduate student
but especially as I got a little older
uh in my years um I couldn't believe
that you know I was reading these papers
about how important it morning sunlight
is and all these things but then my
colleagues were all getting sick and
dying around me or getting what we call
the tenur look where they show up you
know start their job and 5 years later
they look like they've aged 25 years
yeah and I realized that I I wanted to
avoid that so I've always just enjoyed
learning and sharing science and health
tools and uh so thank you for the the
kind words I've I've certainly um been
um kind of both astonished and
positively amazed in the ways that the
pandemic and the post-pandemic years I I
like to think we're in the post-pandemic
years I I think we can safely say that
now um how they've drawn people's
attention to this idea that they need to
take agency into their own healthare
that that no one no one no pill potion
injection Etc can replace good behaviors
um pills potions and injections uh can
potentially augment those good behaviors
um and get people going down the right
path which is what we're talking about
today but that it's a it's really a
personal responsibility I mean no no one
can give us a calmer mind no one can
give us a healthier body um no no one
can do that right you can in it's
interesting that some of the wealthiest
people in the world um the new thing
isn't for people to boast about their
their Yachts or their properties it's
about their health it's about their
Vitality their longevity because that's
the thing that I suppose in some sense
money can start to buy but it doesn't
require a ton of funds to take great
care of one's one's body and mind it
doesn't and and what I've learned and
I've had to learn this over time and I
think the wisdom is is and this is why
it's it's even more challenging because
I think people you know go on social
media and they listen to podcasts and
they listen to influencers and and a lot
of the messages is additive right if
you're not doing a high-intensity
workout every day and then doing sauna
for x amount of time and then coal
plunge and all this kind of dieting
you're not doing it well I know that
that is cumul that that stress of that
is cumulative to people right and so
what I've learned and I have a really
good friend probably the most you know
affluent successful but also the most
generous and smartest person I know who
lives on the big island and he says to
me which is worth repeating here I look
for every opportunity to surrender and
it is that surrender to people who you
can trust to guide you right so you
don't have to be the quarterback of
everything right and that takes off the
pressure and I think finding it's not
always about adding it's it's actually
creating space for us to just be in that
flow right like it's to be in like and I
know you've talked about this a lot that
kind of active rest place where it's not
about being super focused it's not about
just going to sleep but almost the best
parts of our day is when we're in that
flow state where things just click and
to me helping people with those you know
types of times and figuring that out is
the most valuable and and I don't think
people talk about that enough so I
appreciate that you do a lot yeah well
and I appreciate that you're um bringing
up this notion that you know just
stacking more and more behaviors like
you got to crush a workout and do sauna
and that is not the message you know
sometimes um we get teased and there's
some good comedy uh takes on me um
uh that make me chuckle now and again um
about that but that's not the the
approach these These are tools that
people can can uh it's a buffet um and I
think most everyone agrees that sleep is
key um most everyone agrees that
exercise is key nutrition is key great
social connection is key when it comes
to um because I want to make sure that
we um Circle back to this when it comes
to the peptides it seems that one of
your approaches if I may is to kind of
raise the hide so that the you know the
boat can get you know get out can get
out to see and we were talking about
these growth hormone secret toogs we
covered um uh uh GH rp6 which is the one
that stimulates appetite that's probably
going to be a niche case condition that
people would want to use that ellin
tesalan saralin I get a lot of questions
about is it
mk677 what in the world is mk677 it
sounds like a weapon it does it's yeah
it's it's just I think it's just like
ghrp6 however it's it's absorbed well
orally so it's basically the same I see
it working this very similarly to G to
ghrp6 so stimulates appetite it does can
stimulate cortisol prolactin it sounds
like a not good situation for most
people not for most people although you
know let me give you an example where it
is I have a client very successful Guy
and um he's been on testosterone he's
doing all the things right he's in his
early 60s he's he's working out well
he's he eats well super well all these
things he can't put on muscle mass well
right and and actually as people get
older that does become an issue for a
lot of people is maintaining healthy
muscle mass
mk677 before it was taken off uh the
compound list by the FDA it's another
one that was included oh another acronym
take it out by the FDA acon but you can
take it orally which again removes the
stigma or burden of having to do a shot
and you will increase your appetite and
that actually is a very useful agent you
know metabolically for people as they
get older um and I know this you know my
kind of approach with this and both
personally and professionally is I try
everything I can and I remember mk677 I
took it bedtime and it was an hour later
I was in a dead sleep and I woke up and
I had to go eat this it sounds like
puberty it was I was like what is going
on cuz I didn't totally understand I was
like what oh I took that c oh my gosh I
should never have taken it right before
bed and I had to go up and eat and
destroyed my sleep that night but I
learned and I always learn and I'm
grateful for it but don't take that one
at bedtime um but it absolutely will
stimulate your appetite which sure the
growth hormone secretagogues that um
your more typical patients who don't
want to stimulate appetite um both male
and female patients uh prefer what what
are you compounding for them I I test
some realin I I don't see any appetite
stimulation from that hexarelin we
haven't talked about that I don't really
see talks about hexel yeah hexarelin
hexarelin yeah sure arellin I think of
is more again if we talk about the
flavor of these peptides how I kind of
look at it in my head is more of the
energy endurance growth horm releasing
peptid I like it for people to use it in
the morning they get a nice burst of
energy they feel it's a clean energy
it's not a caffeinated energy or jittery
or anything like that um and it's good
for more endurance type you know
Athletics are working out so people in
that you know field of competition or
whatever um I think hexon is a great
choice does not Spike appetite I have
not seen that is taken first thing in
the morning you get an additional growth
hormone release yes you do yeah you do
uh in the early mornings when you're
waking up and and you used to compound
it with CJC 1295 to get the other
Pathways involved that can help but now
CJC has been taken out by the FDA right
but hexarelin still exists that can be
compounded what's the dosage on
hexarelin that you typically prescribe
100 micrograms it's the same as these
other like ion
ghrp6 uh 100 micr the the two that are
different would be teston
uh ideal dose is 2 milligrams per dose
um which is 2,000 micrograms so quite
different and then semonin has a
actually very broad dosing range
anywhere from 200 micrograms uh I've
used it up to 3,000 micrograms depending
on you know your goals we were talking
about coenzyme Q10 and the um kreb cycle
yeah um and I forgot to close the hatch
on supplements more broadly yeah um
again doesn't sound like you're a big
fan of taking lots of pills and capsules
I think some people will take that as a
relief I think a lot of people get tired
of taking a lot of pills some people
don't like to do that um what are some
of the other things that um you do take
besides coenzyme Q10 um earlier we were
talking about
methylated vitamins of meated B vitamins
yeah this is becoming increasingly
popular we're starting to hear more
about methylation and methylated
compounds um could you educate us on
methylated B vitamins yeah and I think
people are familiar with it um you know
some people are talking on podcasts
about the MTHFR snip we've not talked
about that in this podcast so it' be
nice sure so so a snip is a single
nucleotide polymorphism meaning that
genetically things don't flow as easily
again that's an
oversimplification um and you know you
could be homozygous for that meaning you
have both genes making you you know
influencing you more you could be
heterozygous meaning it's just one gene
meaning one copy from one parent or
homozygous copy from each parent you say
it way better
and so um what that means is and where
we see that reflected homosysteine is a
is a marker we use a lab marker we use
it's an emerging marker for looking at
one's cardiovascular risk profile and so
if one's got an elevated homosysteine um
and elevated by some Labs is can be
greater than seven by most Labs greater
than nine um means you're at an
increased risk of what that is I don't
remember but you're an increased risk of
having a cardiovascular event which
would mean a heart attack or stroke and
so we want to lower that number
and the best way to lower that number is
taking ample methylated B vitamins
methylated means you're adding a methyl
group um so methyl B12 methyl folate
trimethyl glycine methionine these are
all methylation donors which just
metabolically and through your
detoxification Pathways in your liver is
going to help you lower that
homocystine um I'm sure it's more
complicated than that but that's most
people if you're going to take a B
vitamin take a methylated B vitamin
because then you overcome even you again
I don't we've done a lot of MTHFR
testing I don't think it's as profound
as some people make it out to be like
it's going to change their life I've
never seen that can it help you sure but
you're going to overcome it by taking
sufficient methyl B vitamins anywhere
and again those methylated B vitamins
are methylated B12 B12 folate uh there's
a methylated B6 there's uh and then
trimethyl glycine um TMG is is a good
compound methine is a good methyl donor
is an amino acid are these taken in the
morning or in the afternoon I like
taking them in the morning although I
think you know for people to play around
with cuz I've certainly seen it you know
people get that 3 P.M kind of Slumber um
as opposed to reaching for the coffee or
the dut take some more methyl B vitamins
and see what happens or just the coffee
no sorry you're not supposed to drink
caffeine too late in the day lately what
I find I don't know this is wrong to
bring up on this podcast but I can't
help
myself I love y bate in the morning and
afternoon okay coffee in the morning now
makes me feel nauseous I don't know if
I'm pregnant or something but it makes
me feel nauseous but I love the taste of
coffee in the afternoon this is like a a
midlife thing I don't know what it is um
so I now in the afternoon like around 1
or 2 p.m. even just the smallest amount
of coffee is like it's like the most
delicious thing I've ever tasted yeah I
love coffee um it can mess with your
sleep too late in the day but um that's
a perfect segue to talk about sleep sure
um because one thing that I know you've
done a lot of work on and with are these
peptides that can improve sleep not just
by virtue of enhancing growth hormone
release but um you know I'll just be
very direct I um for the last gosh like
four to six months I've had the
opportunity to try
pineline um and uh injectable pineline
um combined with glycine yes um goodness
gracious in the positive sense of the
goodness gracious you're from the south
so I don't know where where people how
they never before have I found something
that can improve the amount of rapid eye
movement sleep that I get yeah besides
rapid eye movement sleep deprivation you
know sleep deprivation the next night
you'll get a compensatory effect that's
not the way to increase your Rim sleep
folks you know there are a lot of things
like um high-intensity exercise that
improve my slow wave deep sleep um cold
plunge early in the day improve slow
deep sleep there been a few other things
but with pinin I'm and by the way I'm
not doing this every night I do this
occasionally by Rand a little experiment
and I track my sleep using the sleep
tracker that's in eight sleep um and
it's doubling the amount of rapid eye
movement sleep that I'm getting doubling
yeah which is so like from an hour to
two hours or from an hour and 30 near
near nearly 3 hours you know even um I
posted a picture of a sleep score with
some rapid eye movement sleep it's not
something I typically do but um even the
uh the the most competitive of
biohackers
uh Brian Johnson was like oh nice sleep
score you know um now he touts a sleep
score that's perfect every night for you
know um for for every night but um and
I'm kind of poking at Brian because we
like to poke back and forth we're
friendly with one another um so the
point being that pinealon is a
remarkable way to increase rapid ey
movement sleep I have very little
knowledge about it except that I my
understanding is that it might stimulate
some um regeneration or stimulation of
the Pineo sites so the pineal that's
exactly it mhm you've nailed it yeah I
remember when you messaged me after
starting it and you were like this is
amazing it's amazing yeah that you were
saying amazing I hope the FDA doesn't
nuke it as a consequence of this
conversation I hope so too no but I mean
your response is what wece with our
other patients who are who are loving
and I think that combination with
glycine I'm a big fan of glycine and
injecting it seems to work really well
um but back to your question about
pinealon yeah I mean it's a bit one of
the smallest peptides uh but I think
it's one of the most profound we used to
combine it with epitalon the the Russian
peptide that was used for circadian
rhythm and for my understanding um
epitalon also um it's involved in DNA
repair and might has been explored in
animal studies for um trying to offset
vision loss in some retinal degenerative
conditions yeah again put on the do not
compound list um with all the others
that's gone um but panon stays and
remains and yeah your response to it and
experien with has been very commonplace
from working with patients and seeing
that it's I I think there's a circadian
rhythm aspect with it as well you know
and helping with melatonin production
obviously that comes from the pineal
gland um I this is just I'm postulating
I think there's more to the pineal gland
than we understand oh yeah um yeah it
makes things other than melatonin that's
for sure yeah and I think it's kind of
elusive but I think there's something to
it and I say that having used a lot of
panon with people over the years and
having very similar respons mon es um
which is awesome like everyone knows
like you said when you sleep better your
entire day is better when you sleep
better your life is better like
exponentially better I think of the
millions of people that suffer from lack
of rap and eye movement sleep the lack
of
neuroplasticity that can be the
consequence of that the lack of um
healthy removal of uh emotional labels
on previous day memories
that is the consequence of REM
deprivation the enormous um impact on
depression rates the enormous impact on
pretty much every mental health issue is
made worse by by lack of REM sleep so I
I say or I raise this conversation about
pinealon with um a little bit of
trepidation because I do worry that on
the one hand people will see it as a
miracle drug that's not what we're
talking about it has this effect but at
the same time I okay I'll just say that
you know there's another drug that was
released recently um uh this is a FDA
approved drug um in the category of
sleep drugs called the Doras so it works
a little differently it doesn't um push
on the sleepiness system so to speak it
um it suppresses the wakefulness system
and the idea is that it's supposed to
increase REM sleep okay was by name quic
and things like that um I tried it it
was a total disaster for me I fell
asleep woke up 3 hours later couldn't
fall back asleep I tried it with lower
dosage it's extremely expensive as well
so I'm going to piss off whoever makes
cor Vivic I forget who makes it it was a
complete disaster for me yeah um um
pinealon has been incredible and here's
what's really interesting about it to me
is
that it seems to improve my sleep on the
nights when I don't take it which makes
total sense if it indeed is providing
some regeneration of the pine
pinealocytes that make melatonin and
other sense to me yeah so here we're
talking about something that one could
potentially pulse with now and again and
get Improvement in sleep every night yes
yeah wild yeah and it's I mean I think
it's worth noting that you you also take
care of your health on many other
aspects and that's probably why you were
sensitive to it but it worked really
well for you right and some other people
it's going to take longer you know if if
they're you know having to work on their
diet and having to work on their
exercise and having to work on their
thought patterns right we don't talk
that about that enough having positive
thoughts um but yeah it's and it's so
safe we've never ever seen I mean I
never ever have seen a side effect or
negative side effect from pinealon
it's and and your response has been
uniform you know it people don't always
get there as quickly but people get
there with their sleep love it and so
and you compound it with glycine yeah
what's the rationale there I really like
glycine as an inhibitory
neurotransmitter um it's coming to the
nervous system uh over the years I tend
to start with that when people are
having trouble settling down at night
not that it's going to sedate people um
but just transitioning from you know
being active you know 8:00 p.m. 9:00
p.m. wanting to settle down glycine in
pretty large dosages at least most
people think they're starting with 3,000
or 5,000 milligrams orally um kind of TS
down the nervous system people relax a
little bit and then they tend to sleep
better from it and then you can dial it
up I mean I've used very large dosages
for the other advantage of glycine is it
works on Phase 2 liver
detoxification uh which is amino acid
conjugation so you're helping your liver
work better um and in a world where
we're being exposed with all these toxic
things from glyphosate to heavy metals
we all need to do some sort of you know
liver mitigation strategies glycine is
one of the best wow interesting uh we
haven't done an episode of this podcast
yet on heavy metals but we're um I'm
very interested in in this because many
people write to me asking about Metal
toxicity and about mold toxicity molds
become super big yeah big um yeah I mean
it's it's very prevalent and it seems
the more we talk about it I mean we've
seen it for years and years and years it
makes sense right like if you think
about the amount of airplanes flying
above us every day pouring down heavy
metals I mean it's massive it's in the
air it's in the water it's in the soil
talk about glyphosate or round up same
exact thing so many chemicals and it's
challenging for us as humans the way I
break it down not to get too far off
topic is you know we're water soluble
organisms living in a fat soluble world
it's the job of our liver essentially to
take the fat soluble stuff make it water
soluble so we can excrete it right and
that takes place in the liver in two
phases phase one we're using the p450
enzymes it's like taking the trash
putting the trash and the trash can
putting it out the side of the road you
have phase two amino acid conjugation
the trash truck comes and picks up the
trash very few things in nature induce
phase two independent of phase one
meaning most of us have trash piled up
on the side of our road those things are
the polyphenols right and so things like
the blues the Reds the pigments that's
why it's important to eat a wide variety
of colors in your diet matcha tea you
know has a very strong inducing effect
on Phase 2 liver activity right y I need
to develop a taste for matcha yeah I
feel like it's kind of grainy it is and
it's bitter you know but bitter things
tend to be you know again helping that
phase two um glutathione helps phase two
uh you we do a lot of that intervenous
and then glycine is a wonderful agent
for inducing phase two independent of
phase one and the trouble is I don't
think people realize you know people are
told well you know most Pharmaceuticals
induce a450 enzyme and a misconception
is well if I'm just inducing one I'm
good if you induce one you induce them
all so if you take any pharmaceutical
you're inducing your entire p450 system
you're speeding it up meaning you're
putting more trash out on the side of
the
road and if you look at the amount of
things we're being exposed to outside of
pharmaceuticals it's mounting say on the
side of the road you mean in the liver
yeah that's what I'm I'm just using that
as a metaphor yeah yeah yeah like you're
not about screeing it in the um you're
talking about um building up of of
debris Cellar debris with it or uh
excuse me metabolic debris within your
body right that the the trash again very
oversimplification you need to speed up
phase two to get the trash trucks come
to pick up the trash so that you can
then take that compound and excrete it
in your stool and your urine your sweat
your breath right I mean that's the only
way it works it's not complicated per se
but I think there's a lot of
misconceptions about it so when people
take a peptide that's injectable pineal
and glycine the gain glycine obviously
but for let's say somebody doesn't have
access to to you or to for whatever
reason there's a barrier um to getting a
hold of those peptides um Can people
take glycine orally they can yeah
glycine's absorbed well orally has a
really sweet taste it's actually the
smallest amino acid huge fan of it we've
been using it a long time and you can
take big dosages of it very again I my
starting dose is usually three to five
grams at bedtime wow and then I tell
what my the way I do this recommended is
try that for a few nights in a row not
noticing a thing double the dose go to
10 gram literally most people at 10
grams of glycine will notice it again
it's not going to necessarily make you
drowsy you're not going to be sedated
but your n nervous system is going to be
tone down a little bit it's going to
help you fall asleep a little bit better
and then while you sleep where a lot of
this detoxification process starts
working you're going to be more
efficient in how your liver Works
everything ties together right I'm still
still a big fan of things like magnesium
3 and8 um appenine which is a chemom
mile derivative um and I'll try glycine
I think a few years back I was was using
a little bit of glycine but it was more
like um a th000 milligrams but now that
it's in the injectable peptide yeah
pineline I I don't take it um is there
an oral form of pineline that works that
there's these bio regular bioregulator
peptides um which were developed by this
Russian scientist uh last name cornon I
think done a lot of research actually
there's published research about it I
think pinealon is one of the ones uh
that they say will survive the stomach
acid and get through the gut and be
absorbed um so I I think that's true
we've always used as injectable and um I
tend to like injectable things for the
bioavailability so um yeah but to your
point I think people can those are going
to be harder and harder to find actually
it's probably easier to find an
injectable pinealon than an oral one
yeah and I as we're talking about this
I'm realizing what unfortunately just
the way the internet works that people
are going to start
selling likely as a consequence of this
conversation will start selling pinin
but you need to know that you're
actually getting pinin I mean it's very
easy for somebody to just pop something
up on Amazon and sell it and uh totally
maybe they just throw some melatonin in
there and call it pinin like there
there's a lot of like BS stuff out there
so T this is why the compounding
pharmacy component and working with a
physician uh and researching right
making sure that what you're taking is
is legit lot of illegitimacy out there
do you think the pharmaceutical
companies are going to move into these
other peptides I mean certainly uh uh
epom morelan for the reduction in a
viseral body fat that's an FDA approved
drug um so is cellin FDA approved drug
um uh The glp1 Agonist FDA approved drug
so those are the FDA is unlikely to pull
those but they're Blockbuster um
especially gp1 I mean they're making a a
not even a small fortune but a large
forun big money the the concerning part
about the gp1s is uh to me is what we're
starting to they've been able to be
compounded because there was a uh
shortage and the way it works with
compounding pharmacy is because those
are brand named drugs and they're not
patented for the peptide right they're
patented for the delivery system which
is the pen um which most people don't
realize and they've been able to be
compounded and then way more affordable
because they're compounded um and there
is rumors that the pharmaceutical
companies now have Supply back they'll
come back and they will you know remove
the ability to to allow these peptides
to be compounded which means we'll have
to stick to traditional dosages and
people will lose access because they're
going to be way more expensive I mean
they are if if insurance doesn't cover
it 1,500 a month for for most people
very expensive that's a lot more yeah
for a lot of people that's rent and more
so yeah uh I'm hopeful that doesn't
happen um but that's that's in the works
that's in the works and and that would
be a huge shame and again I'm not a a
pessimist by any means I'm a Perpetual
optimist so we'll just we'll just make
sure it stays this way but you know
again if it does happen we'll get
creative and and go other routes as well
um earlier you mentioned stem cell
therapies y those are not FDA approved
in this country they are actually they
you can you can Sor my mistake yeah so
uh I think that using the term stem cell
is a problem right if we use the term
autus cell right which would be PRP it's
basically the same plasma right they
take your blood they spin down they take
the right and so the ruling is I
understand it as long as you're taking a
cell that from you and you give it back
within four hours then that is allowed
with under the FDA guidelines
interesting there was this clinic in um
Florida a few years ago was um touting
stem cell therapies for macular
degeneration injected some stem cells
into these patients eyes and they went
blind really quickly and they were not
blind prior to the injections that to my
understanding caused a severe setback to
the whole field um I'm old enough to
remember when gene therapy was set back
by about 10 years because a patient
received gene therapy um which is now
pretty common um for certain diseases
and the patient died it's unclear
exactly why they died um but that
delayed the field of gene therapy um by
at least a decade I mean they this
country is very conservative when it
comes to the approval of new
Therapeutics yeah sure yeah yeah no and
I think um like anything there's going
to be people who get too aggressive and
I've heard of doctors injecting stem
cells into people's Diss and then they
get discitis an infection and that can
just spiral very quickly I think it's
you got to be reasonable in you know
what you're trying to accomplish I I'm
excited about stem cells and exosome
therapy and PRP and prf and using them
as you kind of biologics and uh because
I think there's a lot to learn I think
we only know very little um from what
we've seen from working with our
patients it's been tremendous from a
Rejuvenation standpoint I mean we're as
long as you know I think it's taking
from your own you know and then giving
back your own within how the FDA
outlines it I think that's a great way
to do it well certainly you have the
clinical uh clinical data um to back
those statements a thymosin Alpha One uh
what is this peptide but maybe before we
discuss it did the FDA nuke thymus and
Alpha One they did whoa okay they're
coming through with a with a Howitzer
and taking out all these peptides um
okay um well then let's keep this
relatively brief what what was thymosin
alpha 1 being used for previously yeah I
think it was uh from my observation the
best peptide for immune modulation so we
would use it uh if you had an overactive
immune system like autoimmune disease by
definition if someone has an autoimmune
disease their immun their immune system
is attacking their own self right that's
classically lupus rheumato arthritis
things like that celiac disease type 1
diabetes those are all you know
autoimmune diseases we could use thymus
and Alpha 1 and we ton down the immune
response we'd also use it a lot in
postco where you have an abnormal immune
response or the immune system hasn't
caught back up and you can kind of dial
it up using thymus and Alpha 1 in a very
safe way use it a lot with long covid um
and we were using 5,000 micrograms a day
um sometimes intravenously getting great
results very very safe had no issues
with it um but unfortunately it's off
the table I hear a lot of complaints
about um brain fog um with long covid um
and brain fog generally um cerebral
lysen is a very interesting compound um
my understanding is that cerebral lysen
is available in Europe more broadly than
it is in the US is it did the FDA is it
Tak out Avil okay all right cerebral
licon made the cut we see what happens
after this podcast that's right um we've
used a lot of cerebral license um we I
actually have a clinic that's open in
London we actually did use it uh we've
used it a lot more over there than over
here ah so you have a US clinic and a
and a UK Clinic we have a one in based
in London and and one in Charleston yeah
and um I think you know cerebral license
has been used for decades in the setting
of you know poststroke um post traumatic
brain injury the trouble with it again
I've observed with people they get
cerebral license we're talking about IV
you can also use it subq is they will
have a day or two where they feel really
down and out like it's like their mood
shifts to like this dark
place um scary yeah and they come out of
it um but most people don't like that
feeling and so we just we stopped using
it mostly yeah for that reason my
understanding is that cerebral license
is a kind of a cocktail of brain derive
neutrophic factor cery neutrophic factor
like some other things it's not one
thing yeah and I think right I think I
think collectively it increases bdnf
levels right like uh there was dihexa
too you know if you're familiar with
aexa it's another one that was removed
by the FDA uh supposedly the most potent
way to increase you know brain derived
neurotropic Factor kind of the juice the
neurons live in again
oversimplification that's gone but I
think seron did the same thing
interesting so as long as we're talking
about um maintaining or boosting
cognitive function um here's one never
tried um but you and I have talked a
little bit about and uh it it's still
seen as kind of renegade but it's
becoming more common place um and that's
methylene blue and I always make the
joke uh that I used to use methylene
blue to clean my fish tanks right um cuz
I was I'm a big uh fish tank a ficado at
least I was when I was a kid right now I
don't my have a tank but it's it's it's
empty um nope pun intended um what is
methylene blue and what are people using
it for and does it turn your tongue blue
it does for sure um not permanently not
permanently it's actually the uh the
first pharmaceutical ever prescribed in
this country in the late 1800 was
methylene blue goodness here so it
sounds like really Renegade but it's
it's not got it yep um but it's it's
gained favor in the last five years
that's certainly when we learned about
it particularly you know I learned about
it through this doctor who was telling
me with covid patients he was getting
immediate like within a day
uh of stopping of Co symptoms from using
methylene blue that's what like peaked
my interest like wow that's incredible
and then he went on to say that then
covid test ret turning negative within a
matter of like two days which was
unheard of I've seen that with something
else but I'll get back to that yeah and
so that's when I was like oh this is you
know it started to be talked about and
learned about it um so methylene blue
when we talk about the mitochondria
using that mitochondrial membrane binds
to cytochrome C oxidase and I think of
it you know traditionally it's used when
people have carbon Bon oxide poisoning
they'll still use it you go in emergency
your carbon monoxide poison it'll give
you methylene blue and it helps your red
blood cells displace the the carbon
monoxide and put oxygen there and so
you're it's an oxygenator that's how I
think of it is it used as a
performance-enhancing drug in in uh
Endurance Sports because this sounds
like the kind of thing that cyclist
would would really want to use check
with your local governing body there's
always a question I get people like they
hear something in the podcast and they
go can I take it or am I going to get
disqualified and I always say I have no
idea if you'll get disqualified I don't
believe it's on the water list okay I
don't believe we we we'll just look for
the people with the blue tongues yeah
easy test so um methylene blue very
absorbed very well orally you know I
think of it like NAD the molecule NAD
because it works on that you know on
those cytochromes different than Ned
though because Ned is not if you're
taking Ned by itself not absorbed orally
well at all it's one of the trouble with
it methine blue is and actually you can
take way bigger dosages orally than
intravenously we've given it
intravenously a lot but we're Limited
and using it intravenously just cuz
it'll start to cause some spasma of the
vein the arm starts hurting if you're
giving too much methylene blue either
too much or too quickly and so we can
give it orally you can get a capsule of
it that's how we our phy so I think a
good dose is no more than 10 milligrams
10 milligrams taken when in the morning
it is you know it's a cognitive
stimulant for sure I mean I've had more
people over the last 5 years because we
make methylene blue we combine it with
some other agents a little bit of
caffeine some B vitamins and people say
this is the best thing for you know my
brain function recall memory kind of
quote unquote neut Tropic a term I don't
really like because yeah you know there
aren't circuits for being smart there
circuits for y Tas switching but y so
it's 10 milligrams of methylene blue
combined and you've got some other
things in the cocktail version that you
make take it in the morning on an empty
stomach yeah I you could take it with
food though again it's going to be well
absorbed um it will interesting to
people and I need to say it will turn
your urine green or blue for how long um
about 24 hours hour depending and that
be kind of fun yeah well and a good
caveat is if it doesn't and I've had
patients then that's interesting to me
as a clinician because it means that
your mitochondria is not working well
right like the way I see this is you
should get spill over you shouldn't kind
of use it all and if you're not there's
something wrong there that you're using
all of it and you're getting no spill
over back into your bloodstream which
gets filtered into your bladder your
urine which you urinate out that and
that's happened with a couple patients
so it's like oh wow you had no green or
blue urine there's a problem with your
mitochondria so it's putting more oxygen
onto the blood cells correct like your
your hemoglobin is able to pick up more
oxygen that's exactly right um but then
there's the you know a mild MAOI
inhibitor which is monamine oxidase
inhibitor yeah which going to allow
things like serotonin to work a little
bit longer in that synaptic Clift um you
know and you've expounded way better
than I can about serotonin and dop me
and how those work but um there is a
cognitive enhancement from it for sure
it's very real and we have a lot of
people using it and love it it also
seems to be an antiviral you know you
get this again that's probably through
the mitochondria making your
mitochondria more efficient it's a
prescription drug it's a prescription
drug but there's there's now and I don't
totally understand it there's now
strictly over-the-counter neutral
supplement options that are methylene
blue for sure anyone can go online and
buy it
for sure trust me now now there there
are going to be a few and and you talked
about turning your mouth blue if you
take a liquid form right uh and we'll do
that sometimes in the office when we're
doing other treatments we'll give a big
dose of methylene blue to kind of help
fuel kind of quickly make a lot of ATP
which we want to do with some different
IV treatments we do um so we'll give
sometimes up to 50 5 milligrams at a
time um their gums teeth lips are blue
for about an hour or two
and how often um Can people take
methylene blue again I you you could
take it every day I think it I think
it's a little bit longer acting I don't
I don't take it every day I take it
about three times a week I think that's
about right um I do have people who need
it more you know for whatever they're
dealing with I do think you know as a
nutrient if we're going to call it that
it's it's a lot of it's an insurance
policy for your
mitochondria so earlier you mentioned um
a patient or maybe it was patients
plural that experienced a more rapid
transition out of a uh a covid infection
or maybe more recovery from long covid
symptoms Etc uh it reminded me of um the
second time I got covid um far less
intense than uh the first time U but the
second time I got covid I had an amazing
experience where um my covid test was
very strong band it was very clear like
I I had Co there was no question about
it um I didn't feel good I was fatigued
um wasn't super severe I would put it
more kind of on a six six out of 10 okay
on the kind of malaise level no fever
okay so I stayed in stayed in bed and
you know stayed away from people this
sort of thing um but I did an NAD
infusion M of course told them I had Co
they came over they gave me an NAD
infusion right and correlation is not
causation but um I think it was 750
mgram NAD infusion over the course of
about 45 minutes um I had the usual
feelings that one gets when you get an
Ned infusion of you feel like an
elephant is stepping on your legs y um
your chest kind of cramp so you feel and
then when that stops you feel much
better than you go into the thing yeah
um the band was absent the next
day my symptoms were I went from I don't
want to say gone I went from you know
like a 5 six out of 10 as I mentioned to
like a two out of 10 yeah and within
another 48 hours I was good good to go
and better awes now this is correlation
not causation I don't know what was
going could have been the sailing bag
right could have been any number of
things sure um but the shift from a dark
band to no band was so dramatic that I
took another test okay after the no band
and then of course the next day and the
next day you know this kind of thing um
um it it's interesting I I don't know
what it means um but one wonders whether
or not it's just a
um a global way of combating
inflammation you know I I just sort of
anytime I think about a systemic effect
um and the reason I rais this is that I
don't want to give the impression that I
think that like NAD is specifically in
the pathway that was targeted um but
that my brain and body were inflamed
clearly I had an infection so you don't
you could have a flu you could have a
cold you're flamed um what are your
thoughts on that anecdote again it's
just anecdote but what are your clinical
Reflections we've seen it so many times
yeah I mean
the for the longest time and so we've
been using NAD longer than most I'm
fortunate that I was given the original
NAD infusion protocol which came from
Mexico it's kind of a long story I don't
want to bore you but um that dosage of
750 milligrams is actually what we came
up with in my office and that's what
most people adopted just because we've
used used it more than probably anyone
else on the planet huge fan of NAD very
biased but that's only because I've seen
it work over and over and over in
inexplicable scenarios just like you're
describing where it's not just you go
from A to B but you're going to A to Z
very quickly and I used to use the word
transformational talking about it not
just okay going from a sick state to a
well state but and most people going
from a well state to a super well State
really quickly and it's super impressive
so there's a lot more to nid than we
understand right because just very
empirically giving someone this
co-enzyme this vitamin B3 derivative how
is it dramatically changing
symptomatically how someone feels but it
does and I've seen it with thousands
upon thousands of people certainly in
the setting of covid certainly in other
virile infections you name it I have
been more impressed with the work of Ned
than probably any other agent we've ever
used amazing yeah I take sublingual nmn
each day um it makes my hair grow
ridiculously fast I've done the control
experiments I'm a scientist I know how
to do control experiments it's still
just n of one it's just me makes my
nails grow really fast makes my hair
grow fast that's the major consequence
um I don't by the way I want to be clear
I don't have any stake in any company
that sells NAD sure or Ned infusion so
I'm just reporting what I'm reporting um
uh somebody who's uh quite expert in the
uh NAD pathway Charles brener um who I
believe has a relationship to a company
that makes NR supplements I think that's
correct encouraged me to try NR I I took
these um NR supplements this is what
it's um NAD minus a phosphate group is
my understanding um and those I took
orally I I couldn't tell if I got the
same or different effect because I was
taking them together um I didn't
continue to take them because compared
to nmn it was very expensive yeah um and
uh I just stopped taking so I that's why
I use sublingual NN but um in brief
discussions with Charles and kind you
know forging online it seems that there
is some literature human clinical
literature showing that NR can reduce
inflammation is that right yeah okay
less data that nmn can reduce
inflammation at least lack of human
studies okay so we're still kind of in
the it's still murky murky foggy
territory with with respect to the the
research and clinical the biochemistry
yeah and like what does the biochemistry
do in the way I think about it again
because we kind of pioneered the
infusions the NAD drips which for me
transformational just observing lots of
people who I never saw the same thing
with nmn and R you know you're not
having these transformational
experiences within a week um you know
that I I tell the story a lot is I had a
patient he was diagnosed with a chronic
Epstein bar virus which is rare
there it does exist he was depressed and
on disability just cuz he couldn't
almost get out of bed this is mono um
but it was reactivation of epin bar yeah
yeah and so very like fatigued and
depressed and literally on disability
couldn't work and he I said before we do
anything I I the way I operate I want
him to get you feeling better first
before we start to tackle some of the
bigger things we we did the loading dose
of NAD which we came up with five
treatments in 10 days came back to my
office his wife was there she was crying
she goes within a week my husband is
back wow and I've seen that so many
times with NAD and I can't explain it
right and I and if I just stick to the
biochemistry doesn't makees sense oh
you're increased in the Ned n ratio
fueling the mitochondria which are all
over the body thousands per cell there's
something that we just to there's
there's got to be outside the
mitochondrial effect of NAD that's not
well understood so in the backdrop of
our conversation today there have been
uh uh a number of themes but one of the
themes that seems to keep coming up is
that um there are a lot of things about
medicine that we don't understand
totally um and yet there are tools that
seem to work for certain people
extremely well um a few years ago I went
to a meeting this is a foundation
meeting a foundation I was a part of um
where you get to see talks from really
the the best of the best Laboratories um
and they only show unpublished data and
at the time I don't know if this paper
is published yet but at the time they
were showing that they took people that
were diagnosed with um major depression
okay and they start doing a bunch of
metabolomics on them okay now this
sounds pretty standard for social media
it is actually like pretty heretical
like not a lot of uh of places have done
this right so you know a couple thousand
patients blood draws they're they're
trying to figure out ask a simple
question are there any specific vitamin
deficiencies that are associated with
depression and as I recall they
identified a few different types of
vitamin deficiencies so it's not like
one vitamin it's not always methylated
B6 or something like that excuse me it's
not always B6 or B12 um but they found
these you know clusters of patients that
had major depression that were deficient
in a particular B vitamin they
supplemented back the B vitamin and lo
and behold those patients showed
remission of their of their depression
so one could you know conveniently
conclude oh well all depression is a B
vitamin deficiency but of course that's
not true right more likely depression
like fever is just a broad description
of symptoms right
but what was so exciting about this talk
to me anyway was that people were
starting to look at nutritional def
deficiencies as a potential source of
mental illness which now has a bit more
traction but at the time was like whoa
what what are we really saying here I
thought all of depression was a
serotonin deficiency right this kind of
thing so when you talk about NAD having
these transformative effects and the
fact that NAD can kind of um raise the
tide on a number of different biological
processes to me it makes perfect sense
it might have kicked off some
mitochondrial pathway or some some
seller pathway that then fills in a
blank that's desperately needed is that
is that one way that we can
conceptualize that makes total sense to
me okay I like how you described it so
how often do you encourage your already
healthy patients to do NAD infusions
what are the dosages I should mention
the NAD infusions for most people are a
little bit costly they are costly
they're like anywhere from $500 to ,000
or more you're in Los Angeles if you're
in Los Angeles um so assuming someone
has the means so here's what we found
and again just found it by treating a
lot of people and learning is um we do a
loading dose um for most people uh we
found the sweet spot to be 750
milligrams intravenous intravenous um
when they when they were doing uh NAD in
the '90s and they were doing it for
substance abuse so alcohol pain medicine
you know morphine they used it for that
that's where it came from actually it
was in the '90s people traveling to
Mexico for NAD infusions that that
protocol was 10 straight days of
intravenous n
y the dose to use was 3,000 milligram
3,000 Mig and that's why it took 6 to 8
to 10 hours per infusion you could not
get through it putting 500 milligrams in
over the course of 45 minutes is going
to be very uncomfortable many people
take a anti nausea med so I'll tell you
about that so that that comes from so
there was a gentleman in the states in
2006 lived in Louisiana he had a pain
medicine addiction went to Mexico got
the NAD protocol changed his life he
then licensed the use of the only inject
Ned product which was from a South
African company at the time brought it
to the United States opened a clinic in
Atlanta all he did was addiction and I
got to know him because I'm in
Charleston not too far involved in IV
work he was not a physician I don't
remember the time but he came to me and
said hey I need some help because I'm
getting a lot of questions about this
NAD stuff and so he handed me the
original protocol I mean I'm super
grateful and fortunate um but what I
realized is no one has time to spend 6
to 8 to 10 hours in someone's office you
know they may do that once but they're
not doing it more than once so we
started triing you know different
dosages 250 500 750,000 on up and I just
found collectively by watching people
how they did 750 milligrams was a sweet
spot meaning they'd get the benefits
which we can talk about but then they
could get through it in an hour or two
hours and that was meaningful and then
we found that we don't need 10 straight
days that's too much that just is crazy
we found that five treatments in 10 days
again a four people the ability to have
great benefits which were uniform
probably 95% of people who do a loading
disc will come back and tell you their
brain is getting bigger they feel more
creative they have an elevated mood they
can sleep less but have more energy
colors look brighter languaging is
easier I mean this is all very real so I
think it affects the nervous system
first just because of the concentration
of the mitochondria for every single
neuron in the body the physical
components meaning you know recovery and
helping with physical exercise those
come but I think they come later and so
we settled on 750 milligram we settled
on the you know loading dose and then
what I noticed is that people were
coming back between 3 and four weeks
saying hey I don't feel as good as I did
after I did that loading dose and so we
start doing a once a month maintenance
dose and that is what we still recommend
to today some people will do less and
some people do more I have some people
who do it once a week um but plenty of
people do it once a month and then some
people do it quarterly some people do it
whenever they can on average once a
month seems to work really well for
people then during the pandemic um and
realizing this is growing because again
we train practices kind of in the
medicine that we practice we trained 300
350 practices and kind of give them the
Playbook so to speak um people weren't
coming to the office as much with Co so
we started doing it subcutaneously and
actually that's worked out really well
we'll do 100 milligrams subcutaneously
again 5 days on take two days off you
get a little bit of that stomach
cramping from a 100 milligram injection
um like you said can't really be
absorbed well or not going to really
work so you're going to have to inject
it or Infuse it agreed there's a price
point here right um it's going to cost
money um but like most things it's you
know it's to me if I had to pick one
thing for people engaging in N would be
it really yeah yeah I would all the
things we've all the things I've just
been so impressed over the years now
peptides are amazing not to knock
peptides peptides there's so many
peptides and I will get there right
because you can take this peptide for
the nervous system this peptide for the
immune system but collectively One agent
one thing it's NAD has been the most
impactful from where I sit working with
patients well that's a significant
statement so 100 milligrams injected
subcutaneously get a little bit of
stomach cramping yes as compared to the
500 milligrams to 750 or th000
milligrams that one brings in IV the
fastest I've ever dripped it in was I
think like 40 minutes um I can tell you
the record what's the record 3 minutes
and 26 seconds is that you no no no no
no never 500 Mig 750 milligram two
separate people did it 500 cc's of
saling 3 minutes 26 seconds wow it's
insane yeah I don't recommend it no no
we wouldn't allow it to happen it's too
much it's it's you got to have a lot of
experience with that yeah I I found that
because you have to sit there for a
while you you could think okay well you
organize the you know the the plumbing
correctly that you could type or
something but you feel hard garbage
enough during the infusion that like you
get irritable it's actually a very
interesting um window into empathy for
people who have pain totally you know
when when you're in this kind of whole
body kind of systemic pain and
discomfort and you're getting that
saliva I'm kind of sensing it now I have
a distinct memory of this kind of like
for people that get seasick you think
about being on a boat and walking back
and forth um get a little nauseous
someone would walk in the room and
you're like God why are they walking
like that right you know and it's your
own it's your sense of pain I normally
don't have that response to people I I'm
not a moody person um in general but
then you know when you remove the
infusion you feel great and all of a
sudden people seem delightful the the
irritating person it's it's a very
interesting experiment in in Social
empathy it is it's this is just what I
postulate is that a lot of people are
challenged because a lot of people are
numb to the world they live in they
don't feel things and when you do NAD
there is nothing like that experience
and that feeling and so you are going to
just psychologically say something is
changing inside of me and it's something
in powerful because it's when I receive
it it's a lot and to your point what
what we do is we have a kind of an IV
room where we have like eight chairs and
we make it social because when you're
talking to people and learning about
their experiencing it it's there's
actually a lot of healing that incurs
just from that Community that's a
bonding exper experiment um for people
that can't afford the
infusions um injections would be the
next best bet if they can't afford those
would it be the sublingual nmn or NR I
think so I think the nmn I would choose
over NR yeah so it going from most
expensive to least expensive most
expensive would be in uh IV then it
would be um subcutaneous then it would
be NR and then it would be sub a
sublingual nmn yeah okay that's about
right I mean you could do NAD topically
it's a little bit Wild Card doing it
topically you could do it under under
your yeah ptic patches those give me a
really terrible problem is the patch I
get this the patch it's adhesive it's
too strong lots of people get irritated
their skin gets irritated I think the
Ned gets in well but the the patch
itself is a hindrance obstacle and for
those that are listening to this and
they may recall I did episode of this
podcast with Dr Peter AA where we talked
about NAD and nmn and NR and that was
mainly focused on the the research
literature you're not going to find much
um
you know so what we're talking about
here is clinical experience yeah I'm a
full disclosure I'm a clinician through
and through so my experience is
observing people and you're interested
in what works well and but but you know
I I'm confident about it because I've
done a lot of it you know I've seen a
lot of you know how peptides work
because we've done a lot of it this NAD
because we've overseen again a lot of
NAD here and in London all over and the
and the providers we work with so we get
a lot of feedback about what works and
what doesn't work you know speaking of
um clinicians and Science and and all of
this um there are a couple other
peptides that have received FDA approval
um that are commonly in use things like
uh
pt41 um which is in this um melany uh
hormone pathway uh that's used one of
its FDA appr proofed uses uh is I think
the brand name is VII is for um uh
female hypo libido so it stimulates
libido in women it's also used to
stimulate libido in men is that right
can be and it can be helpful for it's
like a
neurogenic uh mechanism for erectile
dysfunction so so it's not just related
to blood flow it's not actually it's not
in pt41 yeah like a fragment or
derivative of the peptide
melanotan um which stimulates Alpha mocy
stimulating hormone which you know uh is
becoming more in play I guess in the
environment I operate in just because of
mold tox toity and we think of mol
toxicity being a biotoxin and hitting
you know msh being kind of the the
General in terms of a lot of these
hormonal Pathways actually and melanotan
can bolster by putting out more melany
stimulating hormone seems to bolster
immune response I think there's an
element with energy too um the downside
of melanotan is it stimulates melany so
you're going to get this tanning and
it's not like a it's like an orange
looking tanning from the inside out yeah
you see it you recognize it so pt41 what
they found is in rats I think it was
female rats were copulating more when
they got this compound and they're like
oh cool and let's try it in humans and
it it's led to that our trouble with it
is very small uh or narrow therapeutic
window and if you give too much you're
going to get nauseous pretty quickly and
some people don't like particularly
women don't like that tanning look it's
not a not a very it can look very
unnatural unnatural is the word yeah the
medial pituitary which it at least my
understanding is the origin of the these
peptides that we're talking about now is
is super interesting and you mentioned
the nausea these peptides hit multiple
Pathways um when we had Dr Zachary
knight from University of California San
Francisco on to talk about glp1 in a lot
of uh detail um he mentioned that you
know some of the nausea associated with
um OIC and mararo and things like that
relates to the fact that there's um you
know there are receptors for these
things not just in one hypothalamic
structure but also in like like area
postma and areas of the of the brain
that are these quote unquote primitive
areas that are associated with um
generating nausea when you need to rid
yourself of a poison that you know
nature conveniently uh engineered us
with um with neurons that when they
detect chemical changes in the blood
make us vomit yeah and but to touch on
that is what we found is if we start
with a again a micro do and go slowly
with the
gp1s the N is virtually unheard of not
saying it doesn't occur but it's super
rare if you just take your time with I
think people have most problems they're
doing they're shotgunning the dose
essentially you're overwhelming your
system so I have two more questions the
first one is a bit of a controversial
one okay
um today we've talked about a lot of
peptides that you've observed incredible
clinical utility for uh we also talked
about a lot of peptides that the FDA has
banned basically to be blunt um we've
also talked about pep that at one point
not too long ago were considered part of
kind of Niche culture like Fitness or
bodybuilding culture that are now
approaching what will probably be
trillion dollar Industries over the next
10 years things like gp1 Agonist so any
listener with um their neurons firing
will'll put two and two together and say
okay what's the deal obviously the FDA I
like to believe has a genuine interest
in our safety they don't want us taking
things that are dangerous for us at the
same time um there seems to be a kind of
clawing back of what's out there and
then um a handing off to pharmaceutical
companies to put out compounds for which
there are tremendous profit margins
corre I mean the profit margins on these
are insane we can't comprehend it we
can't comprehend it so um I you know
mk677 I crossed out right the FDA
grabbed that one um thus alpha 1 crossed
out okay bunch bunch of other things um
that have been uh bpc
157 clawed back
um so how should we frame this in our
mind in other words do you think that
the FDA has um genuine good intentions
of trying to protect the general public
and that's why they're doing this or is
this a plan to kind of um make that
appear to be the case so that these can
then be sold at a very very high profit
margin and perhaps it could be both
right it's not in either or and and I
want to be very clear you know I work at
a major medical school I um but I'll
speak freely anyway right you know um as
would my colleagues like I like to think
that these governing bodies have some
people there at least with very good
intentions sure I don't think it's a
bunch of bad people like writhing their
hands together with getting Kickbacks on
far I don't believe that in fact I know
that not to be the case but like what's
really going on here because this is
kind of weird there's this huge class of
of compounds we call peptides that
clearly have IM immensely beneficial
uses in the right dosage in the right
hands with the right Physicians they're
being clawed
back why it's confusing I I think it's
probably both I think you know I would
say that unfortunately a lot of times
when the government acts they overreach
right like I do think they probably have
good intentions I think there's a there
are probably sound reasons to want to
have oversight of things that seemingly
is the Wild Wild West right and there's
truth to that right because peptides
came on the scene and people started
using them they're recommended here and
there people could get them from still
can research companies and there's not a
lot of corralling of understanding what
what is going on so I'm sure there's an
element to like hey let's understand
this better but on that side I think
they went too far right because I think
if you really look at data or if you
were really interested in that there's
ways to understand how things work
without removing them from the
marketplace so the other side of me is
like just like we're talking about OIC
and mouro semaglutide and tepati are
Blockbuster drugs if you're a
pharmaceutical company and you see that
there's 15 to 20 other peptides which
are really working and really working
because again we've just seen the
clinical response over and over and over
it's not a large you know leap to think
hey if we're a pharmaceutical company
what if we turn that peptide which was
available to the commoner for lack of a
better term into a drug oh like VII that
was done for melany stimulating hormone
Pathways yeah and so I'm sure I think
it's both you know I think um and that's
why I go back
to we have to operate within certain
boundaries right like that's that's
great we have to understand those
boundaries it would be and I and I say
this sincerely I I don't when we're
talking about Healthcare and we're
talking about People's Health I we're
not even close to talking about the
truth for most things right we we're not
talking about why people get chronic
disease we're not talking about how our
food is really overprocessed and the
availability of high quality nutrients
and what that means we're not talking
about all the toxicities we just look at
Roundup glyphosate and its interference
with so many Pathways in the body and
people say you know and Monsanto and
whoever runs that now saying it's so
safe and it's just not true so I think
it's in line with and what I support is
unfortunately and fortunately as an
individual you have to be your own best
Advocate you can't rely on someone to
say particularly the government that you
have permission or not permission to do
this you think it's best for people to
do their own research you know seek out
reliable information right start here I
mean you guys vet so much stuff very
safe place for people to be like this is
where I want to start and then life is
you you learn by exploring and seeing
what works for you it's like you start
with a recipe to cook right but some
people like it saltier some people like
it spicier you got to see what works
best for you and that's why seek out
other people people like myself other
Physicians other people who have
experience saying hey we'll help you
guide you in this and that's where the
magic happens but to be honest we're not
being truthful on many levels when we
talk about health we're just not we
spend so much money for what we're not
making a dent and chronic disease we're
not making an impact we're not helping
people lead Better Lives you know
medicine is great for life and death
things it really is you know I in 200
August of 2020 I had terrible abdominal
pain I just come back from visiting our
friends in Hawaii I kind of tried to
treat myself unsuccessfully eventually
it was on Labor Day I had so much pain
the next day called my friend who was a
radiologist said I need to do a CAT scan
I did the CAT scan he called me on the
way back to the office I had a blood
clot in the vein going to my liver that
had completely cut off I almost died
like it was really serious it could be
hospitalized I'm on blood thinners now I
am forever grateful for Pharmaceutical
save my life right but those same
medicines aren't probably going to help
me lead my best life right and there's
it's it's challenging having been
educated in a very formal conventional
medical system which is dominated by the
pharmaceutical industry is a problem
right we go back to the flexner report
which is like 1917 1915 or something
where they studied medical education and
basically said if you're a medical
school and you're not promoting
Pharmaceuticals and in line and we're
going to kick out alternative remedies
and modalities like Chiropractic and
acupuncture and nutrition they don't
count anymore and that's where we are
the only thing that matters and we see
it as a society we're deemed healthy by
the pills we take right if we're going
to be really honest those pills aren't
making us healthy and by and large
they're not even making us well anymore
you know what I mean and so I think it's
time and it's wonderful to have this
form to be able to talk about like and
this why I support so many other people
talking about it like we need to make a
change in that we need to start being
honest about what we're doing our health
is not going to be coming from doctors
saying taking this pill or that potion
it's not not at this stage and it's more
likely that people are going to feel
healthy from seeing their trainer in
their gym right these why these things
go to the gray Market or black market
because people actually get results you
know what I mean and it's just sad but
true and so to answer your question I
think it's both I think the
pharmaceutical companies are greedy I
think they like making money right I
think they also like helping people
right they want to help people um but it
comes with a big cost and um the
government's there to kind of Corral
that but like most things the government
does they go too far right and uh I
think we need to be honest about those
discussions and it's not threatening and
it's not harmful just to be saying Hey
how do we make this better and how do we
even agree to disagree let's just start
there I really appreciate your take I I
too rely on prescription drugs now and
again um I don't know maybe I'll lose
some following for saying this but I I
I've had some some situations where it
made sense to like take an antibiotic
like after a surgery or something or
like I'm not I'm not like anti-
antibiotics right I also don't take I
don't also don't eat them like M&M's I
also um believe that uh well everything
you said I I generally agree with I
don't have the clinical expertise or the
Nuance to really understand these
governing bodies that's one of the
reasons why I'm asking today and really
appreciate you uh shedding light on this
I think um your clearly a truth teller
you're telling us your truth from the
clinical perspective but it's clear you
also have a a broad uh broad Optics here
um we appreciate that sure yeah this
podcast has always been about bringing
in diverse uh uh outlooks on the same
things and um it's been wonderful today
to be able to explore peptides NAD and
and this issue of FDA approval and FDA
removal as the case may be you said
something earlier a couple of times that
I'd like to uh finish up on um he talked
about positive thoughts yeah you're a
physician yeah uh not a psychologist no
but you're a physician and you're in the
business of making people feel better
and it's clear to me that among your
many talents you have great powers of
observation so what is this thing about
positive thoughts I mean there are a lot
of neuroimmunological data out there
showing that you know stress makes us
sick if we stress too long for
repeatedly for two for to Long stress in
the short period is actually good for us
right um there are some data showing
that positive thoughts can enhance
immune system function Etc the data are
pretty cool um clinically however what's
your observation about mindset and
health I think we're just scratching the
surface and I think it is the most
profound way to affect your life right
so there's a couple things I'll say
about it one no good has ever come from
a negative thought nothing ever good has
come from a negative thought and because
all of us have a choice about every
decision we make to me it's always best
to make a to slant that decision in a
positive frame now it doesn't mean
you're fake about it right people really
suffer people really go I mean it is a
very stressful time right now maybe the
most stressful time in human history and
there's no need to gloss over it and
saying life is you know peaches and
cream cuz it's not for a lot of people
people but what I know just personally
and professionally is that when you
start pivoting towards positivity you
get more positivity right and all of us
every single human has that opportunity
to do that that some people it's way
harder choices they are dealt a much
more challenging and difficult hand lots
of people but if we think about it we
didn't get to choose our eye color we
didn't get to choose our family we
didn't get to choose where we were born
or how we were brought up but we do get
to choose how we respond to those things
and so what I've learned is the more I
there's never enough positivity I can
exude there's never enough positivity I
can be around ever in my life it is just
the most amazing thing and it can never
be taken from you right and so when we
talk about success and Longevity and
health span to me positivity has to be a
part of that because the mindset of
positivity will
override almost everything literally and
and I can't tell you how that happens on
a biochemical or physiological basis but
I know it to be a truth I know it in the
core of my being that the more positive
I am the more I can influence other
people's and plant seeds and help people
be more positive and that is something
that I cherish and just love and it's
not talked about enough you know
specially as a physician we're talking
about the science and oh this study and
you know putting people on this medicine
but really the value and I made this
decision back in 2010 cuz I had my own
practice and I decided to stop taking
insurance and it wasn't it wasn't a
money thing it wasn't like oh it was
because I was no longer valuable taking
five to seven minutes with each person
and seeing 40 patients a day and for me
I felt like I'm not fulfilling my
purpose here when I'm just writing
prescriptions that my purpose will be
fulfilled if I can really have
conversations where I get to know people
and peptides and NAD tie into that
because they are gateways to build trust
trust with me so that I can actually
help you an individual learn how to be
more positive and to slant yourself and
have that posture because ultimately all
of us need the energy and want the
energy to find our purpose right and
once you find that purpose oh my
goodness life gets magical right because
we're all unique we all have a different
DNA structure God gave us that to be
unique to shine our light to contribute
to help others most people don't know
about that cuz they're in pain or
they're tired or whatever they're
suffering and if we can help walk people
through that and help them heal that
that's going to get really good and
that's that's just what I enjoy
doing beautifully said and so grateful
to you for doing that within your
clinical practice for making that
decision a few years back to shift over
to being you know aligned with your
purpose and and the way that you've now
expanded your practice to public
education will provide links to your
practice and to your public education
efforts and for coming here to do uh
this uh significant public education
effort about peptides and other
compounds and um regulatory bodies and
also just the field of medicine and also
just you know I think so often we hear
from scientists or from Physicians and
and we forget the human component and
what's what's so um what's so beautiful
about what you do and the way you do it
is that your Humanity really comes
through oh I appreciate that it really
does I can tell you really care and I
know our listeners and viewers uh can
tell as well so than you um as this
field evolves and advances um please
come back and talk to us again love to
Meanwhile again we'll provide links so
that people can find you and some of the
resources uh that back up what we've
discussed today and Craig Dr coner thank
you ever so much well thank you Andrew
no it's really I'm so honored to be here
um I respect and love the work you're
doing and the light you're shining and
you're helping so many you have such a
wide audience that you know trust you
and it's amazing uh like I said I see it
every day with people coming to me and
and bouncing what you do and saying hey
is this good for me and it's that is
amazing I love that that's how we get
better right we help support each other
um and I just appreciate what you're
doing and being here is a truly an honor
really a big deal for me so thank you
thank you I'll take that in and right
back at you okay come back again I
appreciate it I appreciate you thank you
thank you for joining me for today's
discussion with Dr Craig conver to learn
more about his work and his Clinic as
well as to find links to some of the
things discussed in today's episode
please see the show note captions and if
you'd like to learn more about peptides
including some of the ones that we
discussed today but also some additional
ones please see the link to the solo
episode that I did about peptide
Therapies in the captions if you're
learning from and or enjoying this
podcast please subscribe to our YouTube
channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way
to support us in addition please
subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify
and apple and on both Spotify and apple
you can leave us up to a five-star
review please check out the sponsors
mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast if you
have questions for me or comments about
the podcast or guests or topics that
you'd like me to consider for the
huberman Lab podcast please put those in
the comment section on YouTube I do read
all the comments for those of you that
haven't heard I have a new book coming
out it's my very first book it's
entitled protocols an operating manual
for the human body this is a book that
I've been working on for more than 5
years and that's based on more than 30
years of research and experience and it
covers protocols for everything from
sleep to exercise to Stress Control
protocols related to focus and
motivation and of course I provide the
scientific substantiation for the
protocols that are included the book is
now available by pre-sale protocols
book.com there you can find links to
various vendors you can pick the one
that you like best again the book is
called protocols an operating manual for
the human body if you're not already
following me on social media I am
huberman lab on all social media
platforms so that's Instagram X formerly
known as Twitter threads Facebook and
Linkedin and on all those platforms I
discuss science and science related
tools some of which overlaps with the
content of the huberman Lab podcast but
much of which is distinct from the
content on the hubman Lab podcast again
that's huberman lab on all social media
channels if you haven't already
subscribed to our neural network
newsletter
our neural network newsletter is a zeroc
cost monthly newsletter that includes
podcast summaries as well as protocols
in the form of brief one to3 page PDFs
those protocol PDFs are on things like
neuroplasticity and learning optimizing
dopamine improving your sleep deliberate
cold exposure deliberate heat exposure
we have a foundational Fitness protocol
that describes a template routine that
includes cardiovascular training and
resistance training with sets and Reps
all backed by science and all of which
again is completely zero cost to
subscribe simply go to huberman lab.com
go to the menu tab up in the upper right
corner scroll down a newsletter and
provide your email and I should
emphasize that we do not share your
email with anybody thank you once again
for joining me for today's discussion
with Dr Craig coner and last but
certainly not least thank you for your
interest in science
[Music]