welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford school of
medicine today my guest is Dr Susanna
soberg Dr Susanna soberg completed her
doctoral thesis work at the center of
inflammation and metabolism and the
center for physical activity research at
the University of Copenhagen in Denmark
her research has focused on how
deliberate cold exposure and deliberate
heat exposure can be used to enhance
human metabolism she is the first author
of a seminal study which discovered the
minimum thresholds for deliberate heat
and deliberate cold exposure for
increasing Brown fat thermogenesis which
is essentially a mode of increasing heat
production and Metabolism in the body
and for establishing actionable
protocols that can be used outside of
the laboratory to improve metabolism and
human health Dr sog's research was
published in the journal reports
metabolism in 2021 adding to a long and
important history of research focusing
on the role of cold and the role of heat
in altering various aspects of the
body's physiology including Hormone
Health metabolism and changes in
neurotransmitters such as dopamine and
epinephrine in fact today's discussion
with Dr soberg focuses on the role of
deliberate heat and deliberate cold
exposure on metabolism but it also
includes discussion of the effects of
cold and heat on things like
neurotransmitter production namely
dopamine and epinephrine and
norepinephrine the so-call catacol
amines which strongly impact mood and
Metabolism in addition Dr soberg answers
many common questions about deliberate
cold and deliberate heat exposure
including for instance the difference
between cold showers versus cold
immersion up to the neck versus total
body cold immersion including whether or
not going back and forth between heat
and cold changes fundamentally the way
that heat and cold impact the metabolism
hormones and neurotransmitter production
ction and we talk about almost every
single nuance and variation on
deliberate cold and deliberate heat
exposure protocols as it relates to the
underlying science in particular how
cold receptors at the level of the skin
are impacted versus cold reception and
perception at the level of the brain and
how all of that impacts systems of the
brain and body relating to mental health
physical health and Performance Based on
her scientific research and academic
training as well as her understanding
and use of deliberate heat and
deliberate cold exposure protocols Dr
soberg is considered one of the world's
leading experts on these topics in fact
she is the author of a recent book
entitled winter swimming which is I have
to say a terrific book because it breaks
down chapter by chapter the different
aspects of deliberate heat and
deliberate cold into its various
constituent Parts including cold
acclimation the cold shock response
dangers and safeties of cold water the
impact of cold and impact of heat on
various aspect aspects of human health
as well as specifics relating to Sauna
versus Ice versus cold swimming showers
Etc it's a very thorough read and a very
easy and accessible read that if you are
interested in deliberate cold or
deliberate heat exposure or both will
allow you to embrace those protocols
with the greatest degree of confidence
that you're going to obtain the specific
end points that you're interested in and
to do so safely before we begin I'd like
to emphasize that this podcast is
separate from my teaching and research
roles at Stanford it is ever part of my
desire and effort to bring zero cost to
Consumer information about science and
science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is plunge
plunge makes what I believe is the most
versatile atome self-cooling cold plunge
for deliberate cold exposure I've talked
numerous times on this podcast about the
many benefits of deliberate cold
exposure and indeed today's episode is
focused entirely on the benefits and the
science of deliberate cold exposure
Plunge uses a powerful cooling
filtration and sanitation unit to give
you access to deliberate cold exposure
in clean water whenever you want as we
will discuss during today's episode with
Dr Susanna soberg deliberate cold
exposure especially deliberate cold
exposure done up to the neck in water
can be used to achieve a number of
important end points related to mental
health physical health and performance
I've been using a plunge for more than
two years now I can tell you that it
makes it very easy to get your
deliberate cold exposure at home it
doesn't require much cleaning in fact
it's very easy to keep clean which is
essential you don't want bacteria and
other things growing in your Cal plunge
basically everything about the plunge is
made easy so that anyone including
myself can get their deliberate cold
exposure on a regular basis at home if
you're interested in getting a plunge
you can go to plunge spelled p l u n
ge.com huberman and get $150 off your
cold plunge again that's plunge. comom
huberman for $150 off today's episode is
also brought To Us by Maui Nei venison
which I can confidently say is the most
nutrient-dense and delicious red meat
available Maui Nei spent nearly a decade
building a USDA certified wild
harvesting system to help balance deer
populations on the island of Maui the
solution they built turns the
proliferation of an invasive species
into a wide range of nutrients Den
products from butcher cuts and organ
Meats to bone broth and jerky their bone
broth has an unmatch 25 grams of protein
per 100 calories several guests on this
podcast who are experts in nutrition
have pointed to the value of getting at
least one gram of quality protein per
pound of body weight each day with Maui
Nei that's very easy to do while eating
delicious meals and getting it from a
sustainable Source if you would like to
try Maui Nei venison go to mauii Venison
docomond and get 20% off your first
order again that's Maui venison decom
huberman to get 20% off today's episode
is also brought To Us by thesis thesis
makes custom neut tropics and neut
Tropics is not a word that I like
because it means smart drugs and the
brain doesn't have neural circuits for
being smart rather has neural circuits
for Focus neural circuits for task
switching neural circuits for creativity
and on and on thesis understands this
and Designs custom neut Tropics designed
to get your brain and body into specific
States in order to do the mental and or
physical work that's important to you
such as creativity or Focus or Clarity
if you'd like to try thesis neut Tropics
you simply go to their website you fill
out a brief quiz and they will design a
custom starter pack so that you can
assess which things work for you more or
less well and then they'll iterate with
you over the course of the next few
weeks or months to come up with the
ideal neut Tropic kit for your needs to
get your own personalized neut Tropic
starter kit go online to taketh thesis.
comom huberman you can take that
three-minute quiz and they'll send you
four different formulas to try in your
first month again that's take thesis.
comom huberman and use the code Huber
minute checkout to get 10% off your
first box I'm pleased to announce that I
will be hosting two live events in
September of
20123 the first live event will take
place in Toronto on September 12th the
second live event will take Place in
Chicago on September 28th both Live
Events will include a lecture and a
question and answer period and are
entitled The Brain body contract during
which I will discuss tools and science
related to mental health physical health
and performance I should mention that a
lot of that content will have absolutely
no overlap with content covered
previously on the hubman Lab podcast or
elsewhere if you're interested in
attending either or both of these events
please go to hubman lab.com tour and
enter the code huberman to get early
access to tickets once again that's
hubman lab.com tour and use the code
huberman to access tickets I hope to see
you there and now for my discussion with
Dr Susanna soberg Dr Susanna soberg
welcome thank you so great to have you
here I feel like I should give a little
bit of the backstory of how we got
connected which was that for many years
I've been interested in cold
thermogenesis it was the topic of my
senior thesis in college and I've of
course followed the uh popularity of whm
Hoff and we've had Dr Craig heler my
colleague from biology department at
Stanford who works on cold and its
impact on physiology and sports
performance so for a long time I've been
interested in this area but there's been
a real uh lack of new let's say
high-profile quality scientific
information in terms of how for instance
cold plunges and sauna how that impacts
human physiology I know there's been
some information out there but it's been
sort of scattered and then a little over
a year ago I see this paper in
cellreports medicine and was immediately
struck the first of all the fact that it
was in cell reports medicine I've been
on the cell press editorial board for a
long time now so press journals are of
course phenomenal journals and the title
and the content of the paper was
directly in line with the sorts of
practices that people are very curious
about and then are starting to emerge
things like sauna cold plunges and there
was your name first on the author list
and I reached out to you through social
media and we've done a little bit of
live content there together and I've
been tracking what you've been doing in
the world in terms of your book and
talking about the results in your
manuscript and talking about the science
and impact of deliberate cold exposure
and SAA and I have to say that it's been
a wonderful and remarkable thing to see
and you're bringing so much quality
information about this area that for a
long time I think was kind of Niche and
is now becoming more and more mainstream
so I'm going to start off with a thank
you for being here and a thank you for
the work that you've done and I'm
looking forward to talking to you about
it today so my first question um to get
things started is what is happening when
we get into an uncomfortably cold
environment so for instance if I'm
really hot on a hot day jumping into a
cold pool feels really good but if I'm
already kind of uh at room temperature
I'm a little bit chilly getting into
that same temperature of water doesn't
feel so good right there's a shock there
so if you could just walk us through
what happens when we get into
uncomfortably cold water whether or not
it's by way of shower or cold Plunge at
the level of our physiology and if you'd
like our psychology I think that's a
good place for us to start because I
think it will Orient people to their own
experience if they do that and for those
that haven't done it um might start to
peel back some of the the layers as to
what the underlying mechanisms of cold
are yeah thank you for that question
it's really good to just address what
actually happens in our physiology when
we get cold and you can get cold in many
ways so you can just head out for the
one that gives you the most potent
stressor which is submerging into cold
water and but you could also go in
outside in the cold wind that's also
going to activate your um your
sympathetic nervous system so get all
these neurotransmitter going in your
body and so your your catac colam mines
um let's just address that we are taking
a cold plch for example so if you are
very hot for example um before you go
into the cold water it's going to feel
less it's going to feel less stressful
but the the temperature a difference
from your skin to the cold is definitely
going to give you a a shock but your
core temperature is warmer and that's
going to feel a little bit better so
that's why when people go into sauna for
example and go out then in into the cold
water they they they can do it easily
easier than if they were cold beforehand
could I just um ask you a few questions
so you you mentioned the sympathetic
nervous system which for um people
listening who aren't familiar with that
is the the branch of our nervous system
that's responsible for creating
accelerations in heart rate um feelings
of alertness it's accompanied with
stress and the stress response but it's
accompanied with waking up in the
morning for that matter so it's not
always about stress and then you
mentioned the catacol meines which
um are dopamine epinephrine and
norepinephrine so maybe a little bit
later we'll talk about those individual
neurotransmitters but you raised a
really important point which is
something I get asked about a lot for
people that are curious about using
deliberate cold exposure which is how
cold should the water be and I know it's
very hard to give a straight
prescription for that because I think it
boils down to what you just said which
is it's really the difference between
your current temperature and really the
temperature at the surface of your skin
and the temperature of the water so if
you're very warm getting into cold feels
good if you're already cold getting into
more cold feels stressful um is there
any way that we can start to gauge what
is the best way to approach a deliberate
cold exposure protocol I mean should it
feel
uncomfortable and that leads into the
question of how do we balance the
discomfort with the amount of time that
we spend in so for instance if it's just
a little bit uncomfortable we spending
more time in the cold get us the same
benefit as getting into very un
comfortably cold water for a very short
period of time yeah that it's really
good question and I definitely think
that this could be um future studies on
this as well to really unravel uh what
kind of Protocols are the are the best
way or also for which outcomes of course
so if the temperature is uh very cold
and you feel that and you also feel very
cold then you you should stay in the
water a little bit longer so I think
it's just you should get uncomfortable
cold so as long as you get uncomfortable
cold it's cold enough and you get this
what we call the cold shock so the cold
shock is activation of your sympathetic
nervous system and these activation of
the the catacol mines which you just
mentioned before does the shock mean
that I'm having trouble controlling my
breathing is that a good gauge uh yeah
you can say so because that's kind of
like how we Define it so you
hyperventilate so you have a faster um
uh breathing rate um so that increases
also because you activate your gasping
reflex if you are new to this um but if
you are adapted it it kind of subsides
with time with adaptation so what you
can do is that you can train this cold
exposure and you can kind of like Get
adapted to it so you don't have this
hyperventilating response every time you
go out in the cold water so this is like
building up your resilience building
building up your adaptation is going to
make this shock like subside a bit so
it's it's always harder in the beginning
but you should do hard things right it's
not something that we you shouldn't
think about cold water and cold water
immersion as something that is
comfortable it should be hard because
that's the point of it right if you
enjoy it then yeah then I'm I'm thinking
something is wrong it's not right you
should not enjoy it well this is an
important point that you're making
because I think that many people shy
away from deliberate cold exposure
because it's uncomfortable in a way that
at least from my experience is very
different than the discomfort of
exercise because with exercise for
instance um if running hard you know
running fast and breathing hard is
uncomfortable you can slow down or walk
if um you know lifting weights is
uncomfortable you can remove some weight
or reduce the number of repetitions or
stop with deliberate cold exposure I
suppose you can be sort of halfway in
halfway out of the water or partially
underneath the cold shower but it's very
hard to
titrate and adjust the level to it's
kind of all or none and I've seen um
actually just I can tell this by
anecdote I've done some work with
military Special Operations um I won't
say which country this was outside the
US um and these are very tough
individuals they're used to going
without sleep and doing hard high
consequence high risk kind of work and
they were asked to do some cold water
exposure training and I was there that
day and it was remarkable about a third
of them just went straight in just kind
of grinded through it you know like they
looked stoic anyway to me um there were
a few whimpers no cries about a third um
talked a lot and got really you could
tell that they were agitated and anxious
but they made it through and then about
a third of them just simply would not
get in past their knees or thighs were
just it seemed like they were just
dreading the whole experience some
actually didn't actually go in
completely um which was really
surprising to me and I you couldn't tell
based on their physical appearance or
anything else about them they're all
high performers as to who would have
this response so it seems like people
vary tremendously in terms of their
ability to embrace the discomfort of the
cold is that from your studies is that
your experience as well or or are there
these weird mutants who seem to just
love going into the cold for the first
time so some people just feel better in
the cold and some people are dread the
cold even more and you can say the more
people are pushing the cold away they
might feel the pain even more so they
they they would definitely people who
are maybe the solders you just talked
about they some of them might be already
adapted to the go cold so if they are
not scared of the cold they go out and
they embrace the cold in a better way it
could also be that some people have a
more sensitive nervous system and when
you are a bit sensitive to the cold you
will of course try to get away from it
right and you will also have the Coan
more um feel the Cain more if there if
if you avoid it so the more you avoid
the cold the the more pain painful it
will feel uh when you go into it so yeah
you mentioned being outside in a t-shirt
versus um cold immersion up to the neck
versus shower I think um this is
something a lot of people wonder about
what are the differences in terms of
impact short-term and perhaps even long
term between cold showers cold plunge to
the neck so that could be in ice water
or just very cold
water um immersion with dunking one's
head and then coming up because
obviously people have to come up for air
at some point and then simply being
outside on a cold day in shorts and a
t-shirt or something of that sort so
there are different outcomes um because
there they are very different uh
exposures of the cold to your cold
receptors in your skin so the more you
can say you cover your body in the cold
which you would do in cold water because
there of course cover totally and then
and the molecules are closer to your
skin you will have a more potent um
activation of all your cat receptors in
the skin so that one will definitely
activate your autonomous nervous system
more and Rapid H compared to going out
in a t-shirt in the cold wind just go
for a walk um but that is also something
that's going to activate your uh
sympathetic nervous system meaning then
that you will have an increase in nor
panine
and you will activate something called
uh the the brown fat so this is a
healthy kind of fat tissue that we have
in our body and when you activate that
that's going to um increase your
metabolism before we talk about Brown
fat and I'm so glad you brought it up um
because so much to talk about there uh
what about cold shower I mean obviously
cold shower is somewhere in between yeah
um being out outside in the Air Cold Air
versus uh being immersed up to the neck
if we had more studies on on cold
showers we would learn more about how
does that activate our metabolism how
does that increase our neurotransmitters
in the brain which could also have an
impact our on our mental balance so I
think that would be interesting for the
future um but what we do know is from
from from activating Brown fat and both
from rodent St studies but also in
humans is that as soon as we get cold on
our skin we will activate our Brown fat
so it is is kind of like our first
responder in in the body to keep uh our
um temperature up so our muscles is like
the second tissue in our body we have
two tissues which can increase our
thermogenesis so the brown fat which is
like always like temperature regulating
our body and then we have uh the the
muscles which will secondarily H start
to shiver and that's going to increase
our um temperature in the body but as
soon as you go into a cold shower you
will activate your fat also immediately
so it could be good also for increasing
metabolism in theory because we haven't
really any studies showing how much does
it actually activate the brown fat so if
someone out there wants to do a study on
that great I've thought about why there
are fewer studies of cold showers than
cold immersion and I think the answer to
my mind is that from a methodological
standpoint it's just harder to do
because if people are getting into cold
water up to the neck they're getting
into cold water up to the the neck
whereas if people are getting into a
cold shower some people are larger or
smaller some people are going to stand
under the shower with it hitting their
head some people the back of the neck
you could direct people to do it yeah
but it's a little bit um more difficult
also I think uh for you and I are both
research scientists there's a little bit
of a um methological challenge that
might seem silly to people but it's a
real one which is if people are in a
cold shower also the water is going to
be I'm kind of pushing their clothing
against their skin there's a certain
vulnerability in uh for most people um
coming to a laboratory in the first
place let alone being observed while
they shower whereas when you get into
cold IM cold immersion you're getting
under the water and you know some people
might roll their eyes and say okay
really is that the barrier but you know
science exists in these real world
contexts and this will vary by culture
and things of that sort but we run human
subjects in my lab and I'll tell you
just um the process of getting people to
the laboratory and having them Park and
find the lab and you know it's a whole
new environment with people in lab coats
and people moving around and Where's the
restroom I mean there's a there's a
certain amount of stress just associated
with taking part in a study for most
human subjects so um I uh totally agree
however we need more studies of of cold
showers it's just a harder environment
to control in in my in my mind so it
sounds like any form of cold to the skin
that people register as what you call a
cold shock or uncomfortable like oh like
this is kind of jarring activates the
brown fat do we know what the pathway is
from cold receptor on the skin to the
brown fat I mean how does the brown fat
know that we're cold yeah really good
question and it seems that I I think
that of course in the future we will
know much more about these Pathways but
what we do know is that uh the co-
receptors will send a signal to our
temperature regulating Center in in the
brain so hypothalamus um and that's
going to be um taking in this message
and we have so many C receptors in the
skin so it's going to be very fast as
you can say if you immers the body into
cold water this is going to be so rapid
H so it will have a rapid increase in
neurotransmitters in the brain for no
adrenaline adrenaline and cortisol and
which is not that much but it's but it's
still there so you have this increase in
uh no adrenalin which will then
immediately activate the brown fat um
because the you can say the activator is
the most potent one cold and no
adrenaline that's going to activate the
bra but there's also a direct pathway
from the C receptor in the skin to the
to the brown fat which really shows that
if because of these different Pathways
it shows that that it could be that this
tissue to keep us warm was
was developed in in our evolvement as
humans to keep us warm and to save us
whenever the temperature on our skin
varies just a little bit to keep us in
that right homeostatic balance so we
don't get hypothermic um but also so we
don't get hyperthermic but because it
seems that the brown fat is also
activated when we get warmer in our skin
so it's also um maybe a temperature
regulator in our in our body but the
pathways is different I think it's also
a third pathway from directly from the
muscles so the brown fat is also
activated um even though the the muscles
are starting to shiver so there's an
extra pathway that way to keep our uh
our temperature up so muscles and brown
fat together to to keep us warm so we
don't uh suffer too much in the in the
cold water that's super interesting and
what I here you pointing to is the
existence of three parallel Pathways and
this notion of parallel Pathways comes
up over and over again in biology as you
and I know and I I think it's important
for people to know about because um as
you said so so eloquently the when
something is very important to our
survival or Andor
Evolution the brain and body uh inst
multiple mechanisms for it not just one
and um and so it sounds like it's cold
skin cold on the skin triggers a
response in the hypothalamus which then
activates Brown fat cold receptors in
the skin directly to the brown fat and
then shivering in the muscle to the
brown fat um I want to talk about Brown
fat in depth and learn from you more
about Brown fat um before that however I
want to ask about shiver um I've heard
that shiver causes the release of
succinate um which then activates the
brown fat is it known whether or not
inducing shiver is important and when
should PE people Shiver I mean I've
gotten into cold plunges and shivered
while I was in there and then I've also
had the
experience of getting into a cold
plunger a cold shower then getting out
when even standing outside on a warm day
after swimming in a pool and then
starting to shiver so the shiver comes
later so how important is shiver and
does it matter when shiver
happens yeah well shivering is is good
because that increases your metabolism
and that's going to burn some calories
in your body you shouldn't be so afraid
of shivering I think because the
Shivering as long as you don't get too
hypothermic so if you don't if you don't
sit in the cold water for too long um
and what you just said by shivering
after you get up that is because of the
after drop something called the after
drop is when your core temperature uh
decreases even after you get out of the
cold water and it always does that um
your body because it as soon as you get
into the cold water all the your blood
vessels is going to constrict because
you need to keep your blood in your core
and and keep your vital organs warm so
as soon as you get up that those blood
vessel will open again and the warm
blood will flow out and get colder and
then flow back again into the core and
that's going to decrease the temperature
in your core of course so that's the
drop so that's the got it I'm so glad
you explained that I've heard um years
ago whm Hof I heard him talk about the
drop and I've heard colleagues of mine
talk about the drop that's the first
time I've ever heard it explained
clearly let me let me make sure I
understand this so um I get into cold
water obviously I'm cold vessels
constrict to keep blood near the center
of my body keep me alive I get
out
the warming up of my body allows those
vessels and capillaries to dilate again
the blood goes out to the surface but
the surface is still cold and so that
blood is cooled and then my core body
temperature drops and that's what you're
referring to as the drop and that's what
induces shiver exactly great and then am
I right in thinking that then the shiver
activates Brown fat which then warms me
up again yes got it that's why you
should end on the cold but we can get
back to that yeah let's talk about yes
ending on cold is um you know it's what
I refer to as and what has now become
known as the soberg principle which is
um a really important principle about
the importance of ending on cold um and
not doing what I do which is to get into
a hot shower or or back in the Sun but
we we'll get back to that in in a few
minutes so um that's wonderful um that
you can explain that so clearly because
I think that shiver is something that a
lot of people do avoid people think oh I
don't want the you know the chattering
of the teeth and um and it feels like a
loss of bodily control which really it
is it's it's an autonomic response yeah
but I don't think that people should
should avoid it that much it's just like
seeing shivering as a way of your body
in the in a like it's training it's
training for your for all your cells
it's training for your muscles it's
training off your metabolism and that's
going to increase your What's called the
insulin sensitivity so if you can like
in your mind get used to the thought of
shivering is just like when you go
exercising in the training center and
get that feeling of like oh this is
tough now it hurts a little bit yeah
it's going to hurt because that's what
shivering also does but just a different
way of training your cells in your body
it's going to create what is healthy
stress it's called hesis in the cells
and the more you expose your your muscle
cells or your brown fat cells to these
kind of like healthy stresses exercise
cold and heat exposure it's going to
make them uh better at like activating
and also um at keeping you healthy so as
long as the the cells get exposed to
this it's going to keep them on its toes
you can say because it becomes more
robust um increasing these heat shock
proteins and cold shock proteins in the
cells to um make you more robust for the
next time and that is also what happens
when you go to the training center and I
keep like do drawing that paralen
because people today know more about we
know more about exercise and what that's
is going to do to your muscle cells um
and but the same kind of like training
is also what you do when you go out and
and into the cold water and submergent
into cold water because that is just
your cold training center you can say
that and and also your heat Training
Center going into the sauna because the
cells are getting stronger with hortic
stress so it's the same process just
different
practices I'm so glad that you brought
up the fact that the discomfort or the
embarrassment or both of shiver is still
crucial to uh actually to reach for and
try and experience the same way that
with exercise um I think a lot of people
don't realize this but when we did our
series with Dr Andy Galpin it became
clear to me what should have already
been clear to me and I think that most
people don't realize which is that if we
were to measure um heart rate blood
pressure um stress hormones and
inflammation in a human being during
exercise it would look as if they were
ready to die blood pressure would be
high inflammation is through the roof
but all of that is setting in motion and
AD adaptation or set of adaptations that
allow blood pressure to be lower at rest
that allow um inflammation markers to be
lower at rest all the things that
everybody is seeking with exercise and
in addition to of course the aesthetic
changes that people are seeking with
exercise sounds like the exact same
things are happening with the cold so um
the Redundant message here seems to be
that the more discomfort provided it's
done safely just like with exercise the
more
shivering the um the more cold shock
provided it's not to the extreme and
stop somebody's heart right we can talk
about thresholds for that a little bit
later it sounds like all all of that is
going to set in motion some long-term
changes that will make people feel
better and will improve health could you
just touch on a few of the longer term
changes that are known to occur I mean
I'm well aware of the study showing that
uh I think it was European Journal
physiology it was uh the European
Journal physiology showing long lasting
increases in catac colomines dopamine
norepinephrine and um epinephrine for
many hours after deliberate cold
exposure what are some of the other
things that happen at the level of
metabolism and brown fat in let's say
the hours and um day after deliberate
cold
exposure as soon as you go in of course
there's an activation but it seems like
no you're asking for the the later
outcomes like blood pressure and stuff
like that is that what you mean yeah
blood pressure but also in terms of
metabolism I know that you know in your
study you should and we'll talk about
Brown fat in depth here in a moment but
that there were changes to the brown fat
that equate to changes in for instance
people's ability to be comfor able in
colder environments when they're not
doing deliberate cold exposure or in the
same way that I can um exercise on an
exercise bike or go out for a hard run
but then if I go hiking uh with the
family on Sunday and it's a steep climb
I could do that steep climb more easily
because I'm quote unquote fit as a
consequence of the of the exercise what
are some what are some of the fitness
adaptations of deliberate cold exposure
yeah so what happens is that you you get
adapted a little bit every time you go
so you will like exercise get a Little
Bit Stronger so every time you go into
the cold water for every time you will
be more exposed to it you will you feel
more comfortable in the cold so you
going to you're going to build your
adaptation which happens on a metabolic
level which is going to be the brown fat
so you have more activation of your
brown fat the mitochondria in the the
brown fat cells are going to be um
you'll have more of those and they will
be more efficient at heating you up
because it expects the body expects you
to to do this again so you are prepared
in a way the capillaries in your skin is
also will also become better at like
constricting so you will have a better
Shield of your body to uh prepare you
for the next time so you be become
better at H going into the cold water in
that way so the the body makes these
mechanism and changes your body in a way
so you can expose yourself to the next
time right and uh and also you will have
um also a your um stress response will
also be subside a bit so you will have a
less increase of your uh catac colomines
um with time with time also you will
have because of this activation of your
uh Brown fat or your muscles you will
have an increase in um uh in in your
metabolism which will then make your
insulin sensitivity uh better and this
is shown in in studies for example um
there's this interesting study I found
just before I I started my PhD which was
from um keeper stor
um at L from 2016 where they measured um
metabolism not in not on Brown fat but
they measured insulin sensitivity in
middle-aged men and women uh during one
winter swimming season so they were not
very young like they were in my study uh
but they were they were middle-aged and
I think this is very interesting so they
during these four five months they were
winter swimming they saw that they had a
lower blood pressure after the season
and they had a lower heart rate and they
also saw that they have a better insulin
sensitivity and I think that is very
interesting because if you can have a
better insulin sensitivity you can
prevent lifestyle diseases so um and
with lower blood pressure which is a a
very strong outcome also for telling how
much inflammation you have in the body
and because it didn't measure Brown fat
um I figured that it could be that was
the missing link that was the one of the
explanations to why we see this um less
inflammation in the body so um the
longer outcomes the long-term outcomes
could be that you lower your blood
pressure and you have a lower heart rate
um you also um have a better insulin
sensitivity and a better glucose balance
but that was shown that is shown in my
study I'd like to take a quick break and
acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic
greens athletic greens now called ag1 is
a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that
covers all of your foundational
nutritional needs I've been taking
athletic green since 2012 so I'm
delighted that they're sponsoring the
podcast the reason I started taking
athletic greens and the reason I still
take athletic greens once or usually
twice a day is that it gets me the
probiotics that I need for gut health
our gut is very important it's populated
by gut microbiota that communicate with
the brain the immune system and
basically all the biological systems of
our body to strongly impact our
immediate and long-term health and those
probiotics and athletic greens are
optimal and vital for microbiotic health
in addition athletic greens contains a
number of adaptogens vitamins and
minerals that make sure that all of my
foundational nutritional needs are met
and it tastes great if you'd like to try
athletic greens you can go to athletic
greens.com
huberman and they'll give you five free
travel packs that make it really easy to
mix up athletic greens while you're on
the road in the car on the plane Etc and
they'll give you a year supply of
vitamin D3 K2 again that's athletic
greens.com / huberman to get the five
free travel packs and the year supply of
vitamin D3 K2 and we'll get back to the
uh insulin sensitivity and glucose
balance um that's a an impressive list
of benefits um you know blood pressure
of course most people are aware of blood
pressure and what it is it's what they
measure when we go to the doctor and um
it's not very sexy nowadays you know
blood pressure people oh you know blood
pressure it's not you know people want
to hear about the inflammatome and the
microbiome and all of that stuff is
really interesting but um I think that
blood pressure doesn't get enough
attention um and we have spoken to on
this podcast to Dr Peter AA who um is an
expert in longevity and health span and
things of that sort and and I was
surprised to learn again I shouldn't
have been surprised that the number one
reason people die worldwide is cerebral
vascular disease and cardiovascular
disease and there basically three things
on the list of things to address one is
not smoking um or vaping by the way not
so there are a few other things related
to blood markers apob and things of that
sort but then the big one is blood
pressure and so it's it's interesting
because we don't think about blood
pressure that much anymore um as a as
the kind of people interested in health
optimization and health but blood
pressure is so vital to control so it's
wonderful to hear that deliberate cold
exposure is one way to control blood
pressure I'm guessing in concert with
other forms of exercise yeah um
let's talk about Brown fat and um if you
if you're willing I'd love to drill into
Brown fat at a at a deep level um again
my understanding of this is is far more
Elementary than yours obviously you're
the expert my understanding about Brown
fat is that it's located in specific
areas of our body uh maybe more
widespread than when I learned in school
I thought it was I was taught it was
just at the clavicles in the back of the
neck and upper back but who knows I
learned that there's more of it when
we're children maybe more distributed
throughout our body and that it's rich
in mitochondria but what is so special
about the brown fat like if we could
just go into the biology of brown fat a
little bit what does it look like uh
you've measured it in human subjects
where is it distributed really can it
expand its distribution can we activate
and expand the amount of brown fat as
adults and um for those of you that are
cringing already thinking we're talking
about getting fatter it's quite the
opposite we're talking about not
subcutaneous fat but fat located around
the the organs but please educate me um
tell me where I'm wrong and um expand my
knowledge on Brown fat okay yeah you are
not wrong but um it's definit it's true
that there are more locations of the
brown fat than we previously thought um
there's this very nice study from 2017
by Lightner L where they had made these
PES uh overlays of um their subjects but
they can see where in the body do we
have brown fat and where can we grow
more Brown fat um so to say um so the
brown fat is can is very plastic so it
means that it can it can grow and it can
decrease and this is proven in in
studies where we have seen um um people
with the f cryosa is like a very
specific cancer type where people where
from the 70s where we can see that if
they have this specific kind of cancer
type um they have a t they have this
tumor on the adrenal gland so they have
like a a huge increase in no adrenaline
and because of that they have this
continuous activation of the brown fat
and they have grown a lot of brown fat
in whole body abdomen or where it's
located in these six different places
but it is like very much compared to
like normal people um and what they then
see uh what we learned from the study is
that brown fat can apparently grow if
you have um an increase in nor
adrenaline in the body it's not like you
want that because when that happens you
have a high blood pressure you don't
want it chronically right you you just
want it on like a short amount of time
and then it can grow for a bit but you
don't want it chronically of course not
but because it it activates also your
sympathetic nervous SYM so they have
also showed they had high blood pressure
they had H they lost a lot of weight of
course because this is activating your
metabol ISM so they they found luckily
that when they removed this benign tumor
H that uh the brown fat um decreases
again to normal size and they gain
weight again and they had normal blood
pressure so the story ends well but it's
kind of like proof of concept of that
brown fat can actually grow so it's
plastic in its in its way of like it can
it can grow and it can decrease again so
that's very good good studies to to see
what it what what the body is capable of
but we don't of course want all that
brown fat we just want it to be um we
just want to keep it actually and and
keep it activated because what we see in
studies is also that after the age of 40
um people um Studies have shown that
there is an association with having less
brown fat but increased obesity so of
course we we don't know yet whether uh
Brown fat decreases with a and therefore
we get obese or we get obese and
therefore we have less brown fat but as
brown fat is an insulin sensitive organ
in our body and we get obese H just like
the muscles get less sensitive um
insulin sensitive the brown fat does as
well and therefore it maybe decreases it
could be a
theory that I think could be one of the
reasons why we we don't see that much
Brown fed in in elderly uh people some
have a lot especially people working
outside that there are study showing
this who people who um work outside do
physical work outside farmers and um
interesting yeah Expos themselves to it
so they'll just keep it in that way it's
um and I suppose we should um clarify
for people in case they don't know that
insulin sensitivity is a very good thing
you want that you want yourselves to be
sensitive to insulin um insulin
insensitivity is type two diabetes um
and is associated with obesity um so
just uh point clarification there uh
yeah it's interesting to me I I I
usually work out at home but I I go to a
gym once or twice a week if I can
because it's good if I see uh the
outside world um and there are a few
individuals at the the gym who are
they're not particularly large or
muscular um but they are
incredibly um lean and their posture is
great presumably from the muscular
skeletal work um and they
they're in their 70s and 80s I mean it's
remarkable right and um and I know all
the telltale signs of hormone
augmentation I'm very good at spotting
that there are a few telltale signs I've
talked about this on other podcast and
they're not that's not why they're
they're they're um they're fit they're
they they're clearly of that look and
you see this outside the gym too of
course for people that look like they've
done a lot of physical labor their whole
life yeah they're just moving a lot they
they have strong hands and features and
they're um and they're not necessarily
excessively lean but you can tell that
they've been using their muscular
skeletal system and I like to talk to
these people and asked them like not
what are you doing now for your workout
but what what did you grow up doing you
know and I would say and obviously I
haven't run statistics on this but more
than 75% of them respond that they grew
up on a farm or that they did some sort
of manual labor or were a postman or a
postwoman or doing something where they
moved a a lot for their early years and
throughout middle age and most of them
are now in retirement but some of them
are still working and they all still
moving a lot so the relationship between
shiver and brown fat makes sense to me
but is it the case that as we're just
moving around I've heard of neat non um
exercise induced thermogenesis so if
we're just moving around um that we are
activating Brown fat or do does there
need to be this stressor does there need
to be shiver and a cold stimulus or a
heat stimulus to activate the brown fat
in other words um is just staying active
enough or do we need to do some sort of
temperature uh shock type thing like
deliberate cold exposure yeah I think
that is really good question because how
how also why do we have this tissue then
if it's if it has to be extreme then you
can question what what do we need this
tissue for but it seems that you can
activate the brown fat with just a
little bit of exposure to to cold so
cold is the the most potent stressor
activator of our Brown fat because it's
our temperature regulating organ in our
body so first responder to that so the
muscles will be a little bit too late uh
and therefore we have maybe these two
kind of tissues so actually just
exposing yourself or a hand actually
just to cold water so Studies have shown
um that if you just put your hand in
cold water not that you're going to
going to do that all day or or every day
or anything it's not it's it's not
something you have to do but it just
just shows that you can activate your
brown fat just by getting a temperature
change on your skin so you can go
outside and t-shirt that's why also we
were just talking about well people who
works outside or move a lot or get out
in and out of it like changing the
temperature of the body all the time
they will have more Brown fat and uh
activating that is going to keep your
metabolism higher and your insulin
sensitivity a study have also shown this
so the brown fat can be activated as
soon as you just change your temperature
in the skin so going outside in a
t-shirt wearing cooling vests also
Studies have shown this for 10 days it's
going to also grow your uh your brown
fat so you can get more Brown fat if you
expose yourself to the cold you don't
have to start in a cold uh shower you
don't have to start in a cold uh plunge
if you're not really ready for that yet
but just exposing yourself to co wind
has also shown to activate your brown
fat or if you don't want to be like in
this uh awake state um then you can also
just sleep in the cold and you won't
notice it that much maybe but Studies
have shown that if you sleep in 19
degrees Celsius um then you will
activate your brown fat and you will
grow your brown fat so you have more of
it so this very nice studies um from
Hansen it Al from
2017 showed that a group of subjects who
slept in a room at 24° and then they
made this pet C scanning to see how much
Brown fat do they have from the
beginning so what we call Baseline then
they measured again after um a month of
sleeping in 19 degrees and they saw I
think it's remarkable just one month at
19 degrees sleeping there they had a
duet on and they were still had to close
on when they're sleeping so they're
under a cover under a duet under under a
duet yeah yeah the subjects were
sleeping at 19 degre from one month had
increased his insulin sensitivity the
next month they stepped at 24° they
measured this again and then they had
decreased actually a little bit and then
they slept at the 27° so quite warm room
actually for for the fourth month um and
they saw even less activation of the
brown fat and also insulin sensitivity
so it seems that you can expose yourself
and pretty rapidly the brown fat will
respond to this because it's so
sensitive to nor adrenaline right so if
you keep exposing yourself to a little
bit of cold you also get a little
adapted to it but that's because the
brown fat um has grown these more
mitochondria in the cells so these small
energy Fabrics that's going to activate
the cells and that's going to take up
glucose and fat from the fatty acids
from the bloodstream to keep uh the
thermogenesis up and that's going to
clear up some sugar and it's going to
clear so in the in the bloodstream and
some some fat as well so the brown fat
can in that way decrease our unhealthy
fat which is the white fat um and the
white fat is what we don't want too much
of but we still need some of course um
and it's our energy storage so it's very
important that it's there we just don't
need a lot of it so on our thighs and
also around our inner organs that's
where it's it's located so if we can
have activation of the brown fat just by
going out in the cold and just by
sleeping in a cold room or if you are
have courage for it you can go out and
expose yourself in a cold lunch um cold
showers is also going to do the
so you can do different variations of
this just exposing yourself to various
temperatures is going to activate the
brown fat because it was involved to
keep us in a perfect homeostatic balance
regarding temperature so to Keep Us
Alive incredible uh I want to just get a
clarification around this 19 degrees
Celsius um room that they're sleeping in
so they're under a comforter a duvet and
um and you mentioned they had cloth on
uh the room is 19 degrees celsus but the
temperature underneath their blanket
might not be 19° celus so presumably
it's the cold on their face that's
activating uh the the increase in uh
Brown fat that was observed is that is
that a reasonable uh expectation I I
think so yeah because it's you have so
many co-receptors in your face so it's
actually it's enough and it I think
corresponds very well with the studies
showing that you can activate the brown
fat just by putting a hand into a bucket
of cold water H and I did this
experiment myself myself in in my
studies just to see how well did they H
respond to cold water so it was a 4°
Celsius cold water for four minutes and
then I just measured blood pressure and
heart rate to see do they have like an
activation of this I actually also
measured the brown fat during this uh
Cod exposure for four minutes with an
infrared thermography camera to see can
I see that the brown fat is activated
and just just to go back to the location
of the brown fat so usually you cannot
really see activation of your brown fat
because it's located centrally in your
around your central nervous system um
and and the biggest Depot as you
mentioned before is up here under the
the cicular bones so um and very close
to the skin surface and because it's so
close to the skin surface I could
measure it with this very expensive
camera and it's not very feasible for
people to go home and do this don't
because it takes a lot of practice I can
tell um but we measured the brown fat
with this um and and I could see that
after a few minutes that the activation
was there an increase in temperature uh
arose from that um activation just four
minutes so it's very rapid and I'm also
measured in my study how deep was the
brown fat under your skin so it's very
close to the surface which also shows
that it it needs to be there to to heat
you up and heat heat your inner organs
well I'm delighted to hear all of this
and I'll I'll tell you why one is by way
of anecdote I mentioned a little bit
earlier that as an undergraduate I
worked in a lab that studied
thermogenesis and we were doing that in
animals but we had this room that was
very cold the whole room was cold uh the
guy who I worked for at the time had
name Harry Carlile is a very
accomplished physiologist he came from
this lineage I don't know if this
literature is still um discussed much
but it's a beautiful literature um from
Rothwell and stock they were the ones
who discovered um non-exercise induced
thermogenesis the fact that people
bounce who bounce their legs a lot and
move around a lot and have a lot of kind
of um sarcastic movement um burn up to
18
1,800 calories more per day than people
who sit more still fascinating
incredible just incredible um I don't
think that work deser uh gets as much
attention as it deserves publish in
journals like nature so very uh fine
journals but in any event uh one of the
things that I noticed when I started
working in that laboratory was that I
was cold because the room was cold and
um Dr Carlile Harry um said well the key
is to wear a t-shirt in here for about
two three days and then you will cold
adapt I thought well wouldn't I want to
put on a hoodie and get warm in there so
I was comfortable and he said no
actually what you want to do is get
yourself uncomfortably cold activate
your brown fat and indeed when I did
that I think it was just two days of
being in that cold environment then I
could come back on the third day and be
perfectly comfortable because the brown
fat had expanded um um or or added
mitochondria or both and I was perfectly
comfortable in that environment I also
got very very lean in those um in those
days and weeks now i' I've never been
somebody who's very lean nor am I
somebody who carries a lot of excess
adapost tissue I'm kind of somewhere in
the middle I'm sure I could adjust that
with feeding if I want to but it was it
was striking uh what a powerful effect
it had on my entire system of thermal
regulation and one of the things that I
uh also delighted in when cell reports
um medicine published your study is they
had an accompanying um press release
that went out to to those of us that
receive press releases and it described
a um a saying in Scandinavia which is um
essentially I'm not going to attempt to
uh speak uh Danish even though I have
much of my family is in Denmark believe
it or not from Denmark um we have a lot
of Danes in my family um I won't
embarrass myself by trying to speak
Danish as I did before the the
microphones were rolling but um that
there's a saying that I think
essentially translates to in the fall
when when you're approaching winter you
want to actually wear fewer layers not
bundle up when you go outside so that
you can prepare yourself for the cold of
winter and be able to heat yourself up
using your brown fat and that in the
spring as the temperatures are
warming rather than removing layers you
want to wear more layers in order to be
a little bit uncomfortably warm so that
In the Heat of the summer you're better
at Cooling your body do I have that
right and maybe do you know the saying
and would you be willing to share it
only the swedes and um uh and Danes will
be able to understand um maybe the
Norwegians too if you don't know it
that's okay yeah so I know the I know
the the concept of it because we say it
you should you should wear less before
winter and uh and more before summer so
well there it is in English so it
doesn't have to be esoteric but okay
yeah and and you're completely right and
I think this is the this is just
something that we know in the
Scandinavian countries I think that we
we we intuitively know this but if we
just go back a little bit in history I
think that um around the
1950s the the Russian government went
out and said well we should do something
about the
tuberculosis pandemic or epidemic the
was at this time so they they wanted to
have the the people um be more resilient
to the cold and also increase our immune
system so in Scandinavia and actually
also in Russia we put our babies outside
to sleep H in the prom and that is like
to H also to to get more resistant to
the co but also to increase our immune
system and we still do that in Denmark
so we do you really yeah we do babies
are taken out in the cold in the snow in
Frosty rain everything my two boys have
been sleeping out in winter or at least
the F their first many three four five
years because it's like very good for
them and they get a better immune system
and get resilient to the cold so they
will have less colds and also they run
around in a t-shirt when it's super cold
because they have activated all the
brown fat I didn't understand at that
time I must I must say but I kind of
like intuitively also knew because we
have inherited this H way of doing
things with our culture so and I have
heard people coming from the US saying
they are crazy they put their babies
outside and PRS and leave them there and
then they go inside and drink coffee on
the
cafe well I don't think Dames are crazy
I I I I Adore the Danes um they're
they're amazing uh culture and people
I'm so fortunate to have family members
uh from Denmark but I did notice so when
when we were in Copenhagen and I know um
we we saw you there uh not long ago that
was June um the water in the harbor was
was cold for for even though the Pacific
is close to here um which is very cold
uh felt pretty cold but I it was
summertime is um so people were in
summertime mode right t-shirts and
shorts and things that that sort but it
did strike me that people in Copenhagen
are
dramatically fitter than they are in the
United States I mean first of all
everyone's bicycling everywhere yeah um
not many people wearing sunglasses so
trying to extract as much Photon energy
from the Sun as possible which I support
uh as everyone knows that's I'm a big
fan of getting Sun but also um when we
did see swimmers um they were swimming
in this cold water and like it was
nothing and their the range and age of
the swimmers was what was remarkable you
saw the kind of fit triathlete looking
types but also young kids like really
young kids and then people probably in
their again their their 70s 80s maybe
even '90s really
remarkable vastly different than what
you see if you go to the ocean here in
Los Angeles or or elsewhere so um yeah
you Scandinavians are on to something
with this I'd like to take a quick break
and thank our sponsor insid tracker
insid tracker is a personalized
nutrition platform that analyzes data
from your blood and DNA to help you
better understand your body and help you
reach your health goals I've long been
believer in getting regular blood work
done for the simple reason that many of
the factors that impact your immediate
and long-term health can only be
assessed with a quality blood test the
problem with a lot of blood and DNA
tests out there however is that they'll
give you information about certain lipid
markers or hormone markers but no
information about what to do with all of
that data inside tracker makes it very
easy to look at your levels of hormones
metabolic factors lipids Etc and then to
assess what sorts of Behavioral
nutritional supplementation or perhaps
other interventions you might want to
use in order to bring those numbers into
the ranges that are optimal for your
health inside tracker's ultimate plan
now includes includes three new hormone
markers that are critical to measure
during a woman's reproductive and
menopausal years these are estradi
progesterone and thyroid stimulating
hormone if you'd like to try insid
tracker you can go to insid tracker.com
huberman to get 20% off any of insid
tracker's plans again that's
insidetracker tocomin to get 20% off I'd
like to talk about your study um if you
could give us a little bit of the
backdrop about what motivated that study
and then um and then walk through what
you did you know who the subjects were
um what you had them do what you
measured um and as much detail as you
would like to share because I think it's
such an important you know even I fair
to say landmark study because it also
explored not just cold but sauna and the
the co-use of cold and sauna as a way to
proe metabolism and brown fat and other
markers as well and as you do this uh
I'm hoping at some point you might um
tell us some of the observations that
you might have made that interested you
that perhaps were not in the paper
because that's one of the great benefits
of sitting across from somebody who who
did the work in detail so um yeah if you
could tell us about your study um and uh
what you did and what you discovered
thank you for that question Andrew I I
love to like also explain a little bit
what did we do because when people read
this kind of paper they just see the
numbers they don't see what what
happened before that and human studs are
very different from from my study my
study you can do a knockout of something
and then everything is like perfectly
matched and controlled doing human
studies is very far different from that
because people are different even in the
groups so yeah but what we um when I
started this research in 2016 I did not
really know what the brown fat was so I
started reading up on all this and I was
very interested in preventive medicine
um also the studies that I did before
Brown fat was also like very much in in
the preventive side like how can we that
was about something else but the Sweet
Tooth and how can we lower our sweet
tooth and stuff like that so but after
that I wanted to to do something new so
I looked into the brown fat got highered
in this fantastic research group where
they it's a cell group so they mostly
did cell studies and they didn't have
anyone to do a human study yet um and um
but they really wanted me to to do that
so I read upon a lot of research about
how does the brown fat get activated
what have been done already and I
mentioned the paper before with sleeping
in the cold I found that particular
paper very fascinating and that was also
where um at that time I was like okay so
cold exposure as an intervention of
sleeping in the cold could be a good
thing to go out and say well people do
this but on the other hand is first of
all it was already done that was one
thing but the other thing was like well
I wanted to to see if we can do like
some kind of activity so we can have
people move also or go and do something
do something together or whatever and
and and the code uh made us think about
well what about winter swimming and it
was kind of like a bit of a joke in the
beginning it's like winter swimming yeah
it's going to activate the brown fed
right but but when we read the
literature we couldn't really find
anything about activation of the brown
fat with cold water besides hand in a
bucket of cold water that really that
was already there so we were just
thinking okay so it should be very
potent um activation of the brown fat if
it's cold water but very different from
cold air so it was kind of also a new
thing we were going into and uh we knew
that we were going to do like a more of
a um proof of concept study um at the
beginning of it because it was like
winter swimmers um must in theory
activate the brown fat right but we kind
of didn't really know was was this kind
of stressor too much too little or what
will happen actually but we had this
idea about well we always say that cold
water and winter swimming will activate
your metabolism but do but do we know if
it do does that no we don't so um and
while this idea was a little bit fun fun
at the beginning um we kind of accepted
it was like okay let's just try this out
but because we didn't have the funding
for it we was like okay let's do a proof
of concept study uh um let's go with a
small number but enough to see um a
difference between the groups so the
power calculation of that study is done
on uh what we know uh from pet C
scannings of the brown fat so that's the
main outcome of that of course
so um and we wanted to go a little bit
smaller on the numbers of of
participants because we wanted to dig a
little bit deeper into the different
mechanisms and also redo some of the the
dat so I really wanted to do that to see
if I can replicate also the findings and
that's going to take a lot of a lot of
funding but it's also going to take a
lot of time to do it um so the proof of
concept was just going small but looking
at different mechanisms we also took um
fat biopsies for example and looked at
the white fat to see if there was any
differences between the groups before
and after and stuff like that so that's
kind of like how it started and and the
first year was like a field study for me
so I was not a winter swimmer when I
started this it was just oh really no I
wasn't um at all and I would say I was a
bit afraid of the cold myself um bit of
a cold always cold having big
socks on and sweaters and stuff like
that so I was like I am so comfortable
I'm just like everybody else very
comfortable I like being completely
temperature neutral um but I started
like playing with this thought like well
if this is so healthy in theory I should
not pack myself up I should start not
doing that yeah but the first year
observation of winter swimmers on the
jetty they kind of joked about it say
come on you need to try this you cannot
study this unless you have tried it and
I was like haha very funny of course I
can do
that but I couldn't I I read the
literature I understood in theory what
happens when you go into cold water but
I completely understood it when I first
tried it the first few times not so
funny it felt painful it was just like
running too long uh after a long break
and you and your muscles hurt the day
after right you you completely regret
that you took that extra mile what about
when you say uncomfortable you mean
uncomfortable when you got in and when
you were in or uncomfortable afterwards
because I find that um on rare occasions
well I should just full disclosure I I
do deliberate cold exposure every
morning for about a minute to two
minutes in a cold plunge there are days
that I miss but when I'm at home I do
that and when I travel I do a cold
shower I do finish with a warm shower so
um and we'll talk about why that's
probably not the best idea but um and
I've been doing it for some years now um
on and off uh but so just full
disclosure I'm a devotee um and I have
family members that uh hate the the cold
but have gotten into it and and are
starting to like it but they don't and I
don't necessarily like the experience in
the cold water but I love the way I feel
when I get out and I have I'm 100% on
that statement about loving it when I
get out occasionally it feels good to be
in there it feels invigorating and I
think I've learned to control the gasp
reflex and the hyperventilation and I
just have told myself what we know which
is that the forebrain struggles to
engage for the first 20 or 30 seconds
but if you can get past that wall it's
it's far easier to to push through um
but when you say that it was really
uncomfortable do you mean the experience
of getting in or you also felt lousy
afterward yeah it's and very important
to clear that out I only felt very
uncomfortable doing it at the moment but
afterwards the first time I went uh with
with a group and actually my husband was
there as well because I I really wanted
someone I knew um coming alone because
it's very normal if you haven't done
this before you feel a little bit
anxious about it didn't this is shown in
studies as well because blood pressure
and heart rate goes up in in those who
are new to this kind of activity so um I
was a little bit anxious about it so it
was really uncomfortable just doing it
but afterwards as soon as I got up I
felt fantastic and we went into the SAA
and I did three rounds because I just
loved it I love the feeling afterwards
because you have all these neutr
transmitters going in your brain and you
feel more positive you feel I feel
invigorate I had so much energy uh and
that like I I could totally see why
people would do this to get energy
throughout the day because I definitely
had that I didn't have to do three dips
to to get that I think one would be
enough and I often do that also now
today I do one dip sometimes I do two or
three uh dips um in in one round you can
say one day but uh often it's like just
one or two times a week for me that is
enough to to get that energy and to get
that positive feeling and and I think
that that is also why I I put up my
study in that way I wanted to study the
lowest dose you can say the lowest
amount that we can get away with but
still see um health benefits so what I
observed there on the jetty was that
some did it a long time they were in the
water for a very long time and to me it
seemed maybe a little bit extreme could
you give me an example of long time well
so maybe they were like really swimming
and they could be 20 minutes or half an
hour that's a long time that's a long
time and there was like ice and people
who came up I I mean I just didn't
really feel that this is a something
that I wanted to go out and recommend to
people after my research subject dying
either because if you're not adapted I
mean people you know people can do that
also a 20 minute cold shower or 20
minute cold plunge I know people do it
but it's probably not a good idea no
probably not it's going to exhaust your
cells and a make them age too fast so
exactly that's uh when you pass that
htic stress this the healthy stress
level that that's what is happening the
quite opposite is it's a almost chronic
stress actually in the cells well what
happened then was that um I found out
that if I want to have this protocol get
through ethical committee I I really
needed to go like very like Sleek with
the not too long and and make sure that
they were also very healthy and and to
get approval of course of this study um
but what I did was to to recruit winter
swimmers who already have been swimming
for two or three seasons and I just
observed them I said I'm not going to do
an intervention study yet I did that
after but I I wanted to do like a proof
of concept where they were already
adapted to the cold and then compare
them to a match control group who were
matched on um on you can say diet so
were they vegetarian or not um and one
of them was in each group U also they
weren't all vegetarians no no no just
one in each group I going to say with
all the amazing fish meat in uh in
Denmark I'd have a hard time being a
vegetarian the breads are amazing the
fruits and vegetables too but okay so
there were a couple vegetarians in each
group yeah one one in each yeah okay and
then token vegetarian I have family
members are vegetarian so I'm just
poking
fun yeah but they were they were matched
on different things so what we usually
match the mono is also BMI um we chose
one gender in this study and we would
always choose both men and women nor
normally but we do see that there are
different Brown fat levels uh depending
on gender so women have more Brown fat
than men really H yeah interesting yeah
I think it's interesting uh that
deserves study yeah yeah why actually I
think it's interesting because women are
also smaller so in size and mass right
but they also have um a lower peripheral
temperature especially on hands and ears
and is that right that's that's
documented that women do run colder than
men yeah and there's physiologically I
didn't say psychologically no no no we
won't we won't go to the psychological
cold cold heat that's different
something else that's a different
podcast yeah another time so women are
just colder physically uh so on hands
and ears it's measured on that um and
and and feet as well so compared to men
and men have bigger Hearts than women
and they can pump out more blood uh
peripher than in a woman's body so they
that could be an explanation for the
colder hands for example theroc
comfortable state is also different
between G genders so men are more
comfortable at 22° Cel and women are
therm comfortable at 24 degrees celius
and this okay so the thermostat Wars of
home have been now validated yes yes
there's a 2 degrees C by the way prior
to um starting recording uh I made the
executive decision that we were going to
go with Celsius throughout the podcast
um because the majority of the world
uses Celsius so for those of you that
think in Fahrenheit um the internet is
your friend in making those conversions
so we're sticking with Celsius so men
tend to be Thermo comfortable at 22
degrees C women at
24 okay interesting explains a lot about
like also some arguments in the homes
where men are turning down the heater
and women are turning up the heater and
they cannot really so it's it's really
it's I'm on both sides here I understand
the men we understand the women but it's
there is a difference there which was
also one of the reasons why we had we in
this proof of concept study chose one
gender so it is not like only because we
wanted to study men it was just to see
to eliminate H all the confounding
factors which could have an impact on on
our results so um that was one of the
reasons um but also because we
yeah so women have have more Brown fat
than men and otherwise we would have to
like do four groups or something like
that and not having funding yet we were
like okay we need to do like just one a
group just a control group and then a
and a group who will always to Winter
swimmers so I recruited winter swimmers
who have been swimming for two to three
seasons um because I wanted them to be
already adapted but not going too long
in the water so they told me uh I did a
lot of screening here of course
beforehand and interviews to see to ask
them how much do you do and um how much
do you how long do you stay in the water
and I um monitored how long that they
didn't stay in the water and recruited
based on um that they only did like two
to three times per week it seems
reasonable uh for for for Denmark at
least to do that and they stayed only in
the water for one to two minutes so the
cast subsides very quickly and you will
get this activation of your rest and
digest system which is your parasym
nervous system so the the other branch
of your autonomous nervous system and
you get that activation because you
submerge into cold water and when you do
that you have an activation of your
diving response and uh that's going to
slow down the you can say the the
consumption of oxygen also in your body
and that's going to slow down your heart
rate could I pause you on this because
I've heard this before that when we get
into cold water shower or immersion we
get this sympathetic autonomic response
so increased blood pressure increased
heart rate release of neopine phrine
from the locus culus in the brain
release of um adrenaline dopamine
adrenaline from the from the adrenals
dopamine presumably within the
brain but that the parasympathetic
response is activated when we put our
face into cold water or go underwater
and that's a calming relaxation response
so this brings us back to I don't want
to take us off track from you describing
the study but this brings us back to the
first question which is if I go
completely underwater for a moment when
I start my cold plunge does that change
the physiological outcome as compared to
if I just submerge myself up to the neck
and and actually nowadays there's seems
to be a little bit of a movement online
of people putting a bowl of ice water on
their countertop and submerging their
face into it did you see this this a
start I've was see more and more posts
about this so um could you just touch on
the what the dive reflex is and why it
act perhaps activates the
parasympathetic response this calming
response well so the diving reflex is
activated when you submerge into cold
water um even just to the neck yeah or I
thought you had to get your face under
I'm not I'm not arguing different you're
the expert I just want to yeah I haven't
really I haven't read that I've just
seen that you can activate your uh
diving response as soon as you go
underwater with your body um so you
don't have to do it with your face as
far as I understand I could I could be
wrong though um yeah so when when you
activate your uh diving response you
will slow down your um your oxygen
consumption in your body and that is
because the body tries to preserve um
oxygen so you will not get hypothermic
too fast so it's kind of like a survival
system in your body um so this survival
system is very um important for us of
course
so that will be activated and because of
that you will after maybe one minute or
so I'm I can't be precise on that
because I maybe also varies a bit in in
humans so one to two minutes you will
have full activation of the sympathetic
nervous system but also the Paras
sympatic nervous system um and that's
going to activate for example something
like serotonin in your brain which is
like also good for mental balance and
people feeling in mental balance
afterwards they after they go up so that
is like measured on
a questionnaires and also measured like
on on anecdotes of course people tell
all the time that they feel good
afterwards we need studies on this so if
anyone's sitting out there thinking
that's interesting then please do some
studies on that yeah I agree to get more
out on that yeah so you had So You
observe these winter swimmers who have
done this for a few seasons yeah they're
coming around for a new season of winter
swimming and you've decided to recruit
them as subjects
they are getting into cold water um
climbing down a ladder or jumping into
the water up to their neck yeah climbing
yeah okay climbing down a ladder into
because this is done Outdoors what a fun
study to do my my graduate thesis was
done under fluorescent lights with no
windows in a in a building that uh I
mean I had a ton of fun as a PhD student
I actually lived in the laboratory as a
PhD student I loved it so much but um
not something required to do a PhD by
the way but um they're climbing down the
ladder yeah getting up to their neck
staying in for one to two minutes and
then getting out and how many times a
week are they doing this so they do this
two to three times per week and for each
time they go each day they go H they
take three rounds uh off so three dips
and two SAA sessions so they start in
the cold and they end in the cold water
okay so it's get in for one to two
minutes then get out and get into the
sauna yeah um what is the temperature of
the sauna uh about 80° Celsius okay
then how long are they in the sauna so
they stayed there for 10 to 15 minutes
so depending on if they went two times
per week or three times per week okay
and then they get back into the cold for
a few minutes yeah two minutes up to two
minutes yeah okay then back into the
sauna 15 minutes or so yeah then back
into the cold for a third round yeah
back into the
sauna and then then they're ending on
the cold and then back into the cold
again and then ending on cold and uh and
we'll talk about why it's important to
end on cold the so-called soberg
principle um how cold was the water in
this particular given average because I
realize it's outdoor winter swimming so
it's going to vary depending on wind
chill and things as well course of
course so it's a very uncontrolled
environment to do this kind of studi in
but I wanted to do something that was
also very close to something people can
do for free going out in nature and use
that and also have the nature like it's
a very healthy impact on us it lowers
our stress uh stress level as well so by
doing so I also measured the temperature
every time they went so I have this
graph and it's actually in the winter
swimming book it shows the temperature
in Denmark going like from October to
April and it's like starts at 12° I
think it's around 12 12 de Celsius um
the water and then it goes down to 2° in
on average in January and then up again
um so it's within the spectrum of very
cold water I would say from around 15
15° Cel and and down but it was actually
not colder than like 2 to four degrees
like in in on average when it was the
coldest so it doesn't have to be that
cold to be good enough and and enough to
activate our metabolism um and what time
of day are um the participants doing
this cold sauna alternation so I think
they did this uh throughout the day so I
didn't control whether they wanted to go
in the morning in the afternoon or or in
the evening at that time where I set up
the study I would I was not controlling
it in that way I wanted them to go
whenever they had time and I also think
that is the most important message to
give out to give to people is when do it
when you have time it's not if if if
doing it a when you get home from work
and it's 6:00 in the evening and this is
the time where you are where you can do
it then then then try out if it's going
to impact your sleep or not uh if it
doesn't impact your sleep then fine but
you have to try for yourself and find
out what works for you it's the same for
coffee for example right some people can
drink coffee in the evening and go to
bed and they can sleep H I can't or
exercise or exercise exactly so I can't
I can't do that and that's because the
coffee exercise cold water um immersion
it's going to activate your sympathetic
nervous system you have an increase in
stress response in your body and and
that's going to make it really hard to
fall asleep for some people at least
maybe you are super exhausted anyways
and then you will just crash anyways but
yeah but um that's that's the only thing
so I just told them to do this if they
can during the daytime um and that's
primarily what they also did and then uh
all along you're measuring Brown fat by
way of this
infrared uh camera right um so what did
you observe in terms of changes in brown
fat how quickly did that occur and um
and then I'd like to ask also about
sauna a bit more um because earlier you
mentioned that you can activate Brown
fat with sauna as well with heat on the
surface surface of the skin um how long
did it take before you observe
significant increases in brown fat um
and was it increased density of my brown
fat or distribution was it you know
showing expansion to different regions
throughout the body and um maybe you
could also touch on some of the changes
in in insulin sensitivity and metabolism
yeah a very good good question and and I
didn't mention this before but besides
measuring um temperature as an outcome
for brown fat activity we also uh did
pet MRI scanning of the brown fat so
this is like the the golden standard uh
for measuring Brown fat and it's not
very feasible for normal people to get
an an a PET CT or pit MRI scanning of
the brown fat is super expensive um so
we had both uh to see if we could have
like a continuous measure of brown fat
in humans because that was already not
not out there so I wanted to see during
both the experimental days but also
during day and night what kind of like
sadian uh Rhythm do we have in our Brown
fat activity so that's why I wanted to
have that as well so the PET CT scanning
or the pet MRI scanning was to see upon
code activation um stimulation for some
hours do we have activation can we see
the brown fat in this subject and also
during thermoneutrality or thermal
comfortable State uh how is that
activated in each of the group of course
ah so you want to see how comfortable
people were away from the cold water and
sauna just at different um temperatured
environments is that right yes I also
mened that how comfortable are you I I
made this scale like visual analog scale
and asked them how comfortable do you
feel with this temperature um and
throughout the study days during Cod
exposure and thermal comfortable day
that had a whole day where I just kept
them therm comfortable to see do they
activate the brown fat if they're just
completely therm comfortable as good as
we could get with that because we were
asking people um on a scale from one one
to 10 and five being theroc comfortable
where are you on this scale so one would
be very cold and 10 would be super
burning hot um yeah and so that was a
way to like try to figure out how do
they actually feel also during the
studies I also measured um Electro
myography so of of muscles to see do
they shiver during the cooling day uh
sometimes people shiver before they know
they're really shivering so I had
interesting yeah so so our conscious
perception of shivering might not be the
best readout of shiver yeah well if you
also get adapted to the cold water you
will have
less shivering they would be less
vigorous they will be very small so you
wouldn't probably know that you
shivering because it's the Shivering is
so small and the mitochondria in the
muscle cells will be so densed that it
doesn't need to shiver maybe that much
to get that thermogenesis going um
compared to when you're completely new
uh to co water exposure you're not
adapted then the body needs to create
this mitochondria this energy fabric to
keep you you warm and that's also what
the exercise is in the beginning but um
when we measured this we we did see that
the winter swimmers were shivering less
H or uh having less uh vigorous
shivering when they said I'm cold so
even though they they perception their
perception of the cold was pretty
similar in in the in the groups um we
could see that the the activation of the
the muscles that measured on um were
different and more vigorous in the
control group were the subjects
incentivized to be in the study were
they paid or anything of that sort they
just happen to like doing uh cold and
sauna and so that's why they did the
study um well they got paid a little bit
for it but not much and um that's how we
do this St sure I was just curious yeah
I was just curious there might be some
folks that Wonder so so what did you
discover in terms of changes in brown
fat insulin resistance or insulin
sensitivity rather and um metabolism so
what we we saw was we had this kind of
different measures uh to see what's to
try and unre what what's actually going
on when they are already adapted to the
cold water compared to a control group
who was matched on on various parameters
we we did see that the winter swimmers
had an increased insulin sensitivity
they produced less insulin uh on all the
experimental days so besides from just
cooling them and measuring the brown fat
on each of these cooling days there were
two cooling days and one theroc
comfortable day right so I wanted to
measure insulin when they just they were
fasting meaning that they hadn't eaten
in uh eight hours before the study day
um and they were completely laying still
not moving just in a bed um and we
measured insulin uh during the
experimental day just to see how
what level are they on and we could see
that the the the winter swim it had
lower production of insulin and they
also when they had an glucose drink so
we give them that to see if they to test
before we enroll them in studies to see
if they have diabetes for example and
not knowing for example that that
wouldn't that would like ruin maybe the
studies so we test for that and see if
they have like a normal curve so what we
did see in that was that the winter
swimmers had a faster glucose clearance
in the bloodstream so after 2 hours uh
we could see that they had a lower level
and it went the curve went down faster
than in the control group so despite
having lower insulin release they have
better blood glucose clearance which is
really what you want what we all seek
right you don't excessive insulin is bad
insulin being a um more or less a
chaperone for blood glucose um um can do
all sorts of other things as well of
course but um and having high blood
glucose obviously terrible yeah for
cells especially brain cells I don't
think people realize how toxic high
blood glucose is having high glucose is
if you want to kill neurons you make you
make their uh put them in an environment
where there's too much sugar ah um oh
yeah very yeah very neurotoxic I mean
that's and there are mechanisms like
insulin that buffer that keep you know
keeping blood glucose in a reasonable
range so that um it doesn't happen I
mean I think that's why people will go
into insulinemic shock hypoglycemic
shock is also possible so that range in
which neurons are happy is not AIT is
not a tremendously large range
incidentally the range in which neurons
are are um happy and surviving uh is
much greater as one gets colder than
when you heat up I mean you you can
basically destroy brain cells by getting
too hot for too long oh yeah yeah you
can definitely destroy brain cells
permanently by getting too cold for too
long but you have to get really really
cold for a really long time yeah yeah um
very interesting yeah we we're thinking
about doing an episode on um uh sort of
survival of the brain after death kind
of things which actually happens you
know you hear about these people who are
declared dead and then come back and
there is actually now a lot of
cryopreservation type approaches for
that this is uh anyway we risk going
into the the uh the esoteric now so I'll
steer us back to our discussion about
your study but um so if I do the
math these subjects are in the cold
let's say they're doing three rounds of
cold for one to two minutes three t two
or three times a week what were the
thresholds that you discovered were
important for getting these positive
changes in um such as reduce blood sugar
or clearance of blood sugar um being
more efficient uh reduced insulin um
improved ground fat distribution and
density um how much cold exposure do
people need how much heat exposure do
people need in order to extract these
benefits
yeah so when we then calculated the
numbers together we can see that this
was ended up being 11 minutes in total
per week uh so not in one session of
course but they had two to three visits
to the water and the sauna per week so
when we divide that out it corresponds
to being in cold water one to two
minutes at a time but also in the SAA 10
to 15 minutes at a time and I think this
is very like um also similar to what we
see in other studies when we look for
example to the observational studies
from the Finish cohort study from laen
at L for example they published this
very amazing paper in
2015 um some results from this long C
study where they show that um that up to
30 minutes uh in the sauna was uh
healthy and they you you lower your risk
of cardiovascular disease and that's
like the threshold and if you go further
than that then there is not more uh um
healthy benefits to to gain from that so
um and before that it's like 19 minutes
then you will have this dose response
relationship up to 19 minutes that's
really in decreasing your risk of
cardiovascular diseases and I think we
that's per week 90 minutes per week uh
90 minutes per session now per session
yeah per session if we
um uh then compare that with my study
which was 10 to 15 minutes per session
then I think it fits very well with what
we call the htic stress or healthy
stress you expose the cells to this kind
of like potent very uh stressful
situation uh where they increase heat
shock proteins in the cells and that
will repair the cells but if you then
overdo it and you go beyond the maybe 30
minutes in the Sona this observational
study from uh Finland with more than up
to 2,000 Sona bathers where have
followed these for 20 years they see
that a 30 minutes possession is like
enough and if if you go above that you
don't get more health benefits out of it
so I think there's a window where we can
say the healthy stress corresponds to
like 10 minutes and I think it's like
per session per session and it's not
it's not much actually so you don't need
to it shows that you don't have to
expose yourself very much to the Heat or
very much actually to the cold to get
this healthy benefits uh from going into
cold going to heat and have healthy to
benefits on your cardiovascular system
so I think this is a very important also
message to to to get out that you don't
have to go extreme you don't have to
swim for half an hour in the cold water
you can go in the water for one to two
minutes um per session but go up to 11
minutes per week in total and for the
SAA my study showed 57 minutes in total
per week and if we also then divide it
out on these two to three days and two
session each day correspond to 10 to 15
minutes so it's a low Tres hole but I
think it's it's good to have that to
maybe we can aim for that if if people
need to have something to to aim for and
I think and I think it's really good to
have that because then you you don't
have then you don't overdo it and if you
overdo it you exhaust the cells and that
will increase your risk of
cardiovascular disease also so well I
get a lot of questions about this and I
did solicit for questions for this
podcast on on Twitter and one of the
questions that I got was as one becomes
more cold adapted do the benefits start
to wear off or can people do too much
cold exposure of course the answer to
that is yes you can become hypothermic
but I'm sensing a different answer now
which is if I understand correctly um
the threshold is 11 minutes total per
week of deliberate cold exposure divided
into two or three sessions of maybe one
to 3 minutes depending on how long
somebody stays in and then 57 minutes I
want to be careful not to round up um to
an hour but divide it into maybe three
20 minute sessions or so you know um so
one doesn't have to be perfect as long
as you get beyond that threshold exactly
but I I wonder something which
is is it the case that if somebody said
oh you know I'm just going to do one 11
minute session per week that might
actually not be as beneficial as
dividing it up because what you told us
earlier is that the hormetic response
depends on having that cold shock you
actually don't want to become too cold
adapted I mean once the blood pressure
response drops down so in minute four
five and six yeah you're getting very
cold and you're shivering but you're one
is not getting the autonomic stimulus
that they want I guess I could liken
this to um if exercise worked in a way
where it was only the first few minutes
of exercise that really triggered the
adaptation of course this is not how it
works but um in fact probably quite the
opposite um but if that were the case
then it's not simply the total amount of
exercise but dividing up the the the
sessions into little bouts where every
single time it acts as a as a stimulus
that seems to be the key here um this is
very important um because having watch
the landscape of this on social media
but also in books and generally um I
think you're the first person to really
touch on this that the goal is not to
get so cold adapted that you can sit in
for the full 11 minutes in one session
where the goal goal isn't to be able to
do an hour of very hot sauna if you want
to I suppose people could do it for
other reasons but if the goal is to
improve these Health metrics yeah then
the idea is to keep the stimulus a
stimulus short exactly yeah great well
this also I think there's practical
feasibility as you pointed out because
getting into a cold shower or cold
immersion or natural body water for a
couple of minutes is far less uh um you
know challenging to most people than
finding a full morning to go you know
spend there um but I've never really
heard it
articulated that the longer sessions
might not be beneficial and might
actually be
detrimental
um that's very important uh were there
any other observations that you made um
that did not make it into the paper or
that were kind of in the the margin
notes in terms of psychological benefits
um or anything of that sort there was
this recent study on soldiers that
talked about weight loss it's sort of a
controversial study um for a lot of
reasons um but one of the things they
remarked uh in the paper was that there
were a lot of psychological changes
improved buffering against anxiety um
they even the men and women in that
study um reported one of the significant
effects was um significantly improved
sexual satisfaction of they didn't tell
us what that meant for these subjects
but so we won't go there but but a
number of subjective improvements was
there anything that you observed or took
note of in in your study that perhaps
didn't make the main abstract but that
we should be aware of uh yeah there was
some um and I'm I'm today I regret that
I didn't measure on sleep for example I
I frankly didn't really think about that
when I I when I designed the study um so
we were very um much occupied with the
metabolism and kind of had the thought
maybe this could impact Sleep Quality um
and I wish I just I had the thought that
why don't you just ask them in a
questionnaire but I asked them every
morning or every morning was not many
mornings just two mornings actually we
measured on um but the winter swimmers
um told us before I rode them that they
had a really good sleep quality the
control group also had that but they
told me on the day where we measured the
brown fat on on a day and a night night
so for actually two days and two nights
um they told me that they didn't they
had a good night's sleep but they also
woke up so it's just telling me that
they also had like a quick wake up and
then they fell asleep again um and the
winter swimmers uh so that they have a
really good sleep so it's like and in
general they also say we we sleep very
well I sleep very well so it's
anecdotally in general it corresponds to
what I heard in my study but nothing
that I measured on um which would could
be fun to do in the future but we didn't
measure on Sleep Quality that would be
have been a really good idea to do they
also told me that they were very
comfortable when they were cold they
they don't mind winter swimmers they
don't mind um going out for example um
in in the cat with a t-shirt there were
also less uh scared of showing their
skin that was also one observation
interesting yeah so kind of a redu
social anxiety yeah they were just so
comfortable in the lab you as you just
mentioned before coats on and everybody
Jing around it was very busy and um all
the other um scientists out in the
hallway and also my supervisor had her
office down down the hallway and and one
of the winter swimmers one day just got
out of bed after have been in the study
for eight hours we it was a long day
right he jumped out of the bed and had
his clothes in the bathroom and he went
out completely naked he didn't care he
just went out it was like oh wa so
that's a side effect perhaps of getting
too comfortable with the cold um we're
not recommending that although in your
book you um did a uh you dedicated some
let me start that again although in your
book you dedicated some uh pages to um
naked winter swimming or I should say
naked cold water exposure as opposed to
um
uh with bathing suit yeah are there any
data on this I'm sorry chuckling but um
I think in most places in the United
States it's uh skinny dipping is not um
is not legal uh most public beaches
there are a few in fact where I I my
laboratory before moving to Stanford was
in San Diego and I at the sulk Institute
for biological studies beautiful
building incredible Sciences done there
the beach right below that it's called
Black's Beach okay and um and it's a
known nude beach
um and so whenever tourists were heading
down the stairway there um I would you
know sort of let them know especially if
they had kids I'd let them know you know
and it's a nude beach of a particular um
uh of a particular genre so I I'd give
them a little warning about what what
they could expect down below it's a um
in any event th those beaches are quite
rare um in the United States maybe
compared to Europe I don't know um but
yeah maybe yeah so is there anything
special about um clothless versus
clothed um exposure yeah I think in that
sense uh we are a bit more free with
this kind of like but but remember we
also had this winter swimming culture
for so for hundreds of years in Denmark
and the winter the oldest winter
swimming clubs that we have especially
the one we have in Copenhagen where I
did my next study which we haven't
talked about but and it's also not
published yet but um in that winter
swimming club it's the oldest one we
have and it's huge and they they swim
naked at this facility men and women men
anden women and they have Sona where
they can go in together and they also
have the separate sonas but it's very
much a a Danish thing and and I think
it's I think it's I think it's good if
people want that um and I had it in my
book because people want to know if they
have to swim with their bathing suit on
or if they can take it off or what's the
what's the difference is there any
difference in this and if you ask me
there is no difference if you have your
little skinny bikini on it's not going
to do any difference to your cold
exposure or your adaptation it's not
going to do any difference for your
benefits of course but I think that it
has something else it has something to
do with how you also absorb yourself how
you absorb your surroundings and it's
sometime some sense of freedom in skinny
dipping so I think people in Denmark who
does this
is they do the winter swimming because
they feel free when they do that they
come home from work they go to this club
and they skinny dip and they feel like
in touch with nature and they have maybe
done this their whole life so this is an
old tradition in Denmark in some of the
clubs um but the newer clubs that are
coming they don't they don't skinny dip
so everyone has bathing suit I never
Skinny Dip because there are people
around people with phones and taking
pictures all the time so this different
different nowadays everything's recorded
yeah and also this this old tradition is
also fading away because of that yeah I
um I use sauna and cold at home but when
I travel there there's a a b so Russian
B has hot sauna and cold plunge um
there's one in San Francisco called
Archimedes B um and that one is clothing
optional so some people are clothed such
as myself and then other people are not
and it's co-ed most of the time I think
they have male female separated uh
evenings or something like that and then
um the other B is Spa 88 which is in on
Wall Street in New York is an amazing b
as well um and these are starting to
crop up in different cities or maybe
they've been there for a long time and
as deliberate cold exposure in sauna
gets more popular more people are using
them the the one in New York that I that
spy 88 is always clothed um and it's
interesting because you know people here
uh naked or skinny dipping and they they
might get certain ideas in mind it um
yeah all these places are very well lit
and they all have a tone of kind of um
of Health that it's about the kind of
health and and and Wellness um I guess
the point being that um there's no
requirement uh to do one thing or the
other um although in the studies that uh
you did obviously um people were clothed
but I I did um I did pay attention to
those pages in your book I thought it
was interesting that you put some um
some dedicated uh passages in your book
related to this and I think my publisher
wanted that yourish that it was not me
it was like my publisher really wanted
to have it little discussion about that
so I was like okay well I think it you
know it points to a larger theme which
is I think for a lot of people people
who already do these practices um
there's no shock there um for people
that do not do deliberate cold exposure
or sauna I think that um you know there
is this idea perhaps that oh you know
these are um Traditions that are are
kind of Fringe or that they're kind and
I just I want to um cue that point
because there's so many things that are
happening right now in biomedical
research and Medicine you know serious
quality peer-reviewed studies published
in excellent journals like your paper on
things like deliberate cold exposure
sauna um the use of particular
supplements natural natural herbs and
supplements I mean there's an entire
branch of the National Institutes of
Health in the United States dedicated
just to the study of supplements and
behavioral interventions for health like
meditation and breath work really
incredible it's really incredible and
psychedelics of course being something
that for a long time was part of a
certain community and feel and now is
being um frankly adopted by stream Med
medicine even Pharma so it the the times
are changing um and so uh yes I think
it's important to know that um it's
perfectly acceptable and encouraged to
wear clothing so absolutely absolutely
yeah yeah yeah and and one other thing
that uh I wanted to to mention going
back to your questions around with there
were any observations in the studies
which we really maybe haven't discussed
yet and maybe it's in in the back of the
the paper and not mentioned that much
was one of the winter swimmers didn't
have any brown fat when we measured him
zero zero and uh in we do see this um in
in in previous studies as well that some
humans don't have any brown fat was he
did he carry a lot of white fat atopus
tissue was he was he obese no he wasn't
no he was not obese because that he
would not have been in the study then oh
right yes you mentioned this earlier
forgive me no no fine but he was um but
what I did observe before knew that he
didn't have any Browner was that during
the cooling experiment where I cooled
them for uh 2 hours before they go into
the Pet City scanner uh he was not able
to control his shivering like the winter
swimmers uh could so he got he got very
uh cold very easily uh compared to the
others so and without I didn't know what
was different about him but we could all
all our me and the three others were
working on the experiment we were like
okay what's going on because we turned
down the the temperature but he started
like shivering and then we had to turn
it up again and it was just all over the
place the temperature it's not it wasn't
that controlled like the others was
pretty similar protocol I could just do
pretty much the same because they were
same size and also same gender so it it
it was easier uh to like foresee what
was going to happen when will they start
Shiver I quickly learned that but with
this subject it was just with this uh
volunteer was just very much different
and then when we scanned him and didn't
find any brown I I I didn't even think
about it so when we scanned him we
didn't see anything I told the pet C
people to like oh you put up the wrong
uh scanning blame the technology yeah
the technology it was like this scanning
looked like the Thermon neutral day the
therm comfortable day where we also
scanned them to see if they have any
brown fat so you have made a mistake I
was pretty sure and they reanal anal
analyzed this um scanning and they just
concluded well it the scanning was fine
the experiment went well it was just
that he didn't have any brown fat so he
was like what we just in the paper
called a a brown fat negative so he
didn't have any and in in my studies it
would be called a knockout so it didn't
have any brown fat so what the
observation with him and I think that
that's interesting is that he both
shivered very early on and didn't
regulate his temperatures well he also
told me that then he was like a five on
the scale of how comfortable he felt
with the cold um out of so it was from 1
to 10 and five being thermal comfortable
and 10 being uh very uh cold uh and and
one very hot so on this like scale up
and up and down and he he was like more
up and down on this scale than any of
the others it was an observation that I
did um but we did see in his blood
samples also that his blood samples
looked a bit more like the control group
um also his insulin levels were like the
control group so a little bit higher
than the other winter swimmers and he
also had um a a a his glucose clearance
was not as fast as um as the the other
winter swimmers so he was like an
outlier what we call it and in the
analysis we also had to take him out of
the analysis because he was an outlier
um so the results showing that the brown
fat uh is more efficiently activated in
the winter swimmers is without him
having him in that group but it didn't
ruin this the study if we I tried to put
him in in as well and didn't it didn't
ruin the results or anything but just to
to keep it more clear we put to come out
of the analysis yeah so he was a mutant
a knockout yeah and I'm sure they're out
there um very interesting so if you
shiver early um then perhaps you have
less brown fat to begin with although
it's hard to conclude from one person
that's sort of the the the implication
there or you haven't adapted to the Cod
so you should build that up yeah right
so in addition to looking at regulation
of blood sugar round
fat metabolism and so on were there any
markers that you you examined in the
deliberate cold exposure group as
compared to controls um that reveal to
you that deliberate cold exposure could
have additional benefits um say for uh
immune system function um or for any
function for that matter yeah so for we
looked at in inflammation of course we
measure the outcome of blood pressure
and so on but we also measured the IL
six in the study just to see also an
inflammatory anti-inflammatory marker so
I six when up and it also follows with
the i 10 so that is like also very known
in the literature so we measured that
and I think it's very important to to
think about the cold exposure and the
heat exposure as something that then
lowers the inflammation in the body and
with if we can do that we will have an
open door for um preventing lifestyle
diseases right so for um type two
diabetes but actually also for some
mental diseases as well so as known as
depression and anxiety and also
Alzheimer's disease which are all
Associated um in research also neuro
research showing that that inflammation
increases the risk of depression anxiety
and Alzheimer's with neurological
diseases so if we can decrease
inflammation in the body we will
decrease our modern lifestyle diseases
but also these
increasing um mental diseases that we
see in these modern lifestyle times um
so I think that
it's I think it's very interesting that
we can go out in nature and we can use
these natural stressors and it it I
don't want to have it sound very
romantic or anything it's just it's just
exposure to temperature actually just to
cold or to heat that is going to twk our
body into a natural state again and and
reset it where the the homeostasis the
balance has is lost a bit so the body is
going to repair itself in that way and I
think it's beautiful that we can do that
just by changing the temperature of our
body and although people are very scared
of doing this because in our times we
have been way from cold away from heat
temperature for some for decades now um
since we isolated our houses better and
uh we are more sedentary we also sit
more indoor we don't move as much so
this very um modern sedentary lifestyle
has made us more temperature comfortable
just neutral so no no wonder I mean that
obesity is increasing we don't expose
ourself to the Natural stresses that we
did earlier on um in in our evolvement
but Al up until maybe the 70s the 60s
where we started having more like uh
comfortable Lifestyles right and obesity
increases in the in the 80s we can see
that from statistics so I think that if
we can take in cold and Heat and you
mentioned other things also before but
of course exercise is very important
here and also a bit of fasting actually
because it all increases the homematic
stress in the body so it's doesn't have
to be uh other than natural stresses to
the body which then could keep us in
that Natural Balance again could we talk
about what I refer to as the soberg
principle which is to end on cold and
the reason I called it the sober
principles because um in reviewing oh by
the way I wasn't a official reviewer of
your paper but I mean in reading and um
reviewing your paper for its after
published Contents I noticed that you
had people end on cold and this has been
a longstanding debate in the the uh
deliberate cold exposure Community
should you warm up in a with a warm
shower afterwards or get back in the
sauna what should you end end on cold or
end on Heat and the sober principle says
end on cold as I understand it in order
to force your body to heat itself back
up and thereby increase metabolism
further still is that right yes so when
you when you end on the cold you you
force your body to heat up by itself and
that will require that you activate you
keep your brown fat activated and also
your muscles which is a good thing it's
a good collaboration to keep your
thermogenesis up and that's like an an
exercise even when you go home so in
that way you don't have to think about
your cold exposure dipping in in your
plung uh or open sea or what it is as
just a an exercise that you do for one
to two minutes and then it's over if you
end on the cold you have an exercise for
your body going on for hours afterwards
and that's not only on your metabolism
but it's also going to keep your
neurotransmitters activated as well and
increase that because your body is still
cold so you need that those
neurotransmitters to activate the brown
fat as well so that's going to make your
brown fat cells more efficient and also
your muscle cells more efficient so
increase mitochondria in the cells which
will then generate heat very fast so if
you have done this for a few times so
maybe three four five times um being new
to this but have tried it a few times
you will notice a switch where you like
feel that you get easily warmer and you
can keep yourself warmer and that is
also what we shown in in my study is
that the the winter swimmers were
physically uh warmer on the skin
compared to the control group so they
when they are out of the cold when
they're out of the cold just relaxing
and we tested this in in on the days
where they were sleeping in the lab so
we could see that they had a a more
activation of the brown fat higher
temperature so probably because they
also loose heat uh they have higher heat
loss to the body compared to the control
group um because they have a more
vascular skin uh because of the contrast
of cold and heat so they lose heat
faster from the body during that day but
is that a bad thing no probably not
because that's going to keep your brown
fat and your muscles a little bit
activated so you will have to it has to
work to keep you warm I and I would
hypothesize that it also might lead to
some of the um subjectively reported
improvements in sleep because in order
to fall asleep you need your core body
temperature to drop by about 1 to 3° yes
so it's not just sufficient to be
sleeping in a cold room and the blanket
you also need your body temperature to
drop yes and so what you're um saying if
I understand correctly is that by
forcing by ending on cold and forcing
oneself to heat up naturally um that
increases the brown fat storage which I
sort of see as a kind of like the oil in
the candle yeah of the Furnace that is
thermogenesis and
that in turn leads to increased heat
loss which people might think oh I don't
want to lose heat from the body but
there are times when you want to lose
heat from the body basically it sounds
like what we want is to be a very
efficient heating and cooling system yes
that it's not about being cold or being
hot it's really about keeping the system
tuned well keeping the oil in the candle
this brown fat um functioning yeah what
could I ask one question about um fed or
fasted is there any rather are there any
known benefits of doing deliberate cold
exposure and dorsa fasted uh versus um
after a a meal say within the last hour
or something of that sort I do my
deliberate cold exposure first thing in
the morning um so in general I'm fasted
because I don't eat until a little bit
later in the day uh but what's known
about that and was that looked at in
your study I know you measured glucose
but that was as a separate um test away
from the cold away from the cold yeah
but I also tested glucose on the days on
the cold so we measured that as well on
on the cooling days um specifically on
fasting and fat I don't know uh I don't
think that I have seen studies
specifically on this okay um more
science needed um a number of people ask
about the use of deliberate cold
exposure to offset some of the symptoms
of various diseases now here we're not
talking about curing disease we're
talking about offsetting symptoms um one
question I've seen quite often is
whether or not people with rod syndrome
this is a syndrome my high school
girlfriend had the syndrome and I'll
never forget at uh we went at a a school
dance together and um this was when we
first started dating and um she had
rodes which leads to very poor blood
flow to the the uh the extremities and
um and she was very cold so she left to
go to the bathroom and warm up her hands
in the warm water and I was left
standing there at the dance and people
came up to me and asked you know why I
was there and who I was there with and I
kept telling them who I was with and
they didn't believe me cuz they couldn't
believe that she would be with me made
total sense if you knew me at the time
um I was I I was way out of my league
with her um at the time I like to think
eventually I caught up but in any case
um she was in the bathroom for about an
hour so at one point I did consider the
possibility that she had just left but
indeed she hadn't she warmed her hands
back up but people with Rod suffer from
this um from this thing of very very
cold extremities um their fingertips
will even turn blue um you know as if
they were starting to get frostbitten
it's quite dramatic um and that question
gets asked whether or not there's any
use of cold to try and increase the um
elasticity the plasticity of the of the
uh small capillaries and vessels by
everything you've described um up until
now it seems like that would be a
logical thing to do um and in addition
to that whether or not people with
autoimmune conditions people with um any
other types of conditions are known to
benefit from deliberate cold exposure
I'm not aware of any studies but I get
asked about this a lot there were a lot
of questions about this for you in in
the Twitter feed yeah thank you for
those questions and I get them as well
on social media and I have to say that I
I haven't seen any studies directed on
this outcome and measuring ruid syndrome
um I do know that it's it's a it's not
that rare actually a problem and I know
that many women or more me women than
men uh suffer from this um but logically
it would help them if they expose their
hands to cold and also heat to make the
V it more vascular but and I have heard
from people saying that it had helped
them but also heard for some others
saying it didn't help them so studies
are needed on this specific topic I
think MH I hurt my hands when I go into
the coine I don't have this syndrome at
all uh but I keep my hands above the
water you do yeah I do that um often I
take a little bit of a swim and then of
course I to have my hands in the water
uh but it helps me when I then get back
to the Dy um and then take my hands up
because then I can stand there for a
little bit and get my one to two minutes
exposure uh and then I can go up because
then otherwise that would stop me from
being in the water enough time that I as
long as I I would like to so if people
suffer from having this pain in the
fingers and it it can be very intense so
just take the hands up a bit from the
water and uh and that's going to help
you also boots neoprene boots it's going
to help on the feet some people have the
hurt um feel the pain in the feet and or
in the ankles and that's going to help
them also a little bit okay so there is
no problem with keeping hands out or
feet in uh nepr booties if people feel
the need to do that if that's what the
if pain of the hands or feet is a
barrier for people doing uh deliberate
cold exposure then it seems it would be
okay to do uh to keep hands out or to
keep your feet in yes because then you
you do get the exposure uh but of course
hands and feet are very potent uh places
in your body to get a fast activation uh
of your nervous system of course but if
you can just you can also just dip them
and then take them off it's going still
going to activate that but you have your
full body is covered in in the co-
receptors you have a full activation
anyways so you you were providing very
very reassuring information to people
because I know a number of people that
do not like to put their hands in I find
that the more of my body I get in the
more comfortable I am psych I don't know
if it's psychologically Andor
physiologically I find that if where
there's an interface between the water
and the cold it's most uncomfortable so
I prefer to just get everything under I
keep my head out although I these days
I've been dunking all the way in and
then coming out and then dunking once
more with my head under before I get out
after the the plunge um that raises
different question now we're getting
into kind of the practicalities of
deliberate cold exposure which I think
are important um sometimes I'll
experience and I hear from a lot of
people that they'll get a kind of back
of the head headache at the interface of
the of the water um you know when
they're in doing cold immersion to the
neck um okay I assume this has to do
with blood flow that there's Vaso
constriction right up until the neck and
in the region surrounding it but that
maybe there's still blood flow to the
head but do we know what the origin of
these um heada is and again this doesn't
happen for everybody but some people do
experience them okay yeah I haven't
really heard about that one specifically
um so but I would say that there are
different reasons for maybe keeping your
head out of the water but it seems like
maybe for some that could be a reason
for like just getting like a quick head
dunk going all the way in once that's
what I've started doing to eliminate I
it wasn't getting headaches but I could
I noticed that interface and and I
wasn't in the rest of the experience it
so
experience of it so much so I started
dunking all the way in I noticed in some
of the photos that you've put out and in
your book that you'll sometimes wear a
cap while you go in yeah okay and well
it comes from uh different reasons uh so
let's talk about some of the
physiological reasons so when you
submerge in cold water up to the neck um
Studies have shown and this is from
Denmark studies from Bia hospital um
that when you submerge into cold water
up to the neck at Z degrees uh so 0
degrees Celsius very cold um you will
have a decreased blood flow to the brain
by around 30 to
40% and makes sense because you activate
the sympathetic nervous system uh and
and therefore you will have a less blood
flow to the brain makes you maybe a
little bit disser and proof again that
you're you need a heart more than a
brain because when the sympathetic
nervous system gets activated uh blood
flow is maintained to the heart to keep
you alive but obviously taken away from
the brain to keep you from thinking
that's why it's hard to think when
you're stressed yeah well the muscles
and then and your vital organs need to
you have to be able to run away from
that tiger right the rationale Mak total
sense and who am I to disagree with
Mother Nature right well but yeah so one
of the reasons being that you should
keep your head out of the water is that
you could increase that uh decrease in
blood flow to the brain further if you
dun the head so there's this a very nice
paper from um from a a research group in
Canada where they have collectively
looked at different papers where they
compared heat loss in a group in the
papers where they dunk the head and
compared to heat lws uh submerging up to
the neck to see how much extra heat do
we lose from our core when we dunk the
head so and I think it's very
interesting that if you submerge up to
the neck you have a heat loss of 11%
from the body core and when you then uh
also d the head you will increase that
heat loss rate by
36% so that mean I'm not saying that I'm
not I'm not here to say what is right
and what is wrong I just think that
people should know the information so
they can for themselves evaluate what is
best for them but if you increase your
heat loss rate by 36% from your core
that's going to increase your after drop
which we touched upon a little bit
earlier even further so that's meaning
that you you are closer to hypothermia
than you are if you just submerge up to
the neck so you should really think
about whether this is like something
that you want to do or if it's just
better for you not to get that cold in
your core the beanie is also because I
have a little bit of sensitive ears so
it meaning that if there's wind and
because we swim in the open sea in
Denmark we have a lot of wind our wind
our conditions are just very rainy very
windy and when the temperature is also
freezing you could get this um what is
that called um so very cold and Li
headed just from wind so if you also sub
merg into cold water and you then get up
you could you will get a brain freeze
immediately yeah so it is enough to just
go up to the neck wear a beanie to just
not get dizy also because the the um the
heat loss is increased of course but
also the blood flow to the brain has
decreased so the beanie will keep you a
little bit warmer so you can stay for
one to two minutes so it's just a way of
like getting around some of the
conditions also so people can choose
that if they they feel that but it's
quite normal to do in in Scandinavia
where aini I love it and um so for those
of you afraid of doing a two-minute cold
shower what uh Dr Silber just described
uh let's uh you see how um she and
others are capable of doing things far
harder than that um when the way you
describe it with the cold wind and
Scandinavia and uh um is is quite
striking it along the lines of covering
the head um there's this um seemingly
paradoxical uh thing of people going
into hot saunas and wearing wool caps
you know if you go to a or you I go to
uh auna and there are people who are um
well from Eastern Europe or typically or
Finland or um Russia or Ukraine or
elsewhere what you'll see is that many
of them are wearing wool caps in the
sauna which many people think is to make
it hotter that's actually not the case
it actually insulates you from the heat
environment the urg the sense of urgency
to get out of the hot sauna is a braind
driven mechanism and so um the reason
that people wear wool hats in the sauna
is it actually lets you stay in the
sauna longer um because it takes a lot
of heat to the skin before you feel that
you you have quote unquote have to get
out whereas so when you insulate the
brain um you don't get that signal um
it's pretty interesting I've tried this
before just by putting a towel over my
head in the sauna and you can stay in
there you much more easily and for for
much longer you know as we talk about
these different stimuli for um the
hormetic response the adaptation to
stress you know it occurs to me that the
the big ones in our evolutionary history
have been light right I mean you were
talking about seasonal changes um we
know there especially as you go up to
Nordic countries there are seasonal
changes in the amount of Light by time
of year atic ones in fact less so at the
equator of course um light temperature
food
movement and it it's sort of interesting
and and at the same time perhaps it
should have been obvious to us that
there are stimy that our bodies have
evolved to adapt to in very powerful
ways and so the idea that temperature
heat and cold could evoke these
tremendous physiological changes that
are beneficial for us
probably shouldn't surprise us at all I
mean I mean this is why we I mean these
are not um ESO esoteric mechanisms
they're actually the the foundational
mechanisms by which our our body and the
bodies of other animals adapt um so I do
have a question about the uh different
ways that people could approach
deliberate cold exposure so for instance
um children uh I've been to Bas where
there are kids you know six or seven
years old with their parents at the B um
and so they're in hot sauna I'm not
suggesting people do this if they're if
they're not you know adapted to it and
you know talk to your parents kids and
talk to your kids's parents um talk to
your doctors um but is remarkable I mean
uh children doing sauna from a young age
or deliberate cold exposure are there
any data on this and is it safe assuming
that you know obviously that they can
swim and or they're doing this in a in a
tub or shower um and then I'd also like
to ask you about are there any
additional male female differences I
know you're study focused um on men but
um other Studies have focused on both
and you of course um are a woman and can
attest to your own experience with this
um so children men women um differences
there in terms of protocols is there
anything that people should build into
the structure of of their deliberate
cold exposure that's unique to that uh
so yeah so this was on cold exposure so
um yeah I think that um starting with
the the question about children um I
think that it's important to to think
about as children are smaller than
adults so we cannot really completely
transfer all the information and the
benefits and also protocols for how long
and and and stuff like that to children
we cannot do that because they are just
smaller in mass and one study that
actually um proves this is a study where
they have compared heat loss uh in um
children boys who were 12 years old uh
compared to um adults um men and looked
at the heat loss of the core temperature
and exposed them to a one or one or two
minutes um cold exposure or immersion up
to the neck and what they saw was that
the the the boys in this study could
actually defend the core temperature in
same way as the adults could but they
had to use their muscles way faster so
it means that they couldn't stay for as
long uh and they use more energy to
defend their core temperature compared
to the to the adults but for one minute
it seems that they could actually comp
but they will be colder when they then
come out because they are smaller in
their Mass to their Rao right so it
means that if the surface is so large on
children and their mass and muscles
being smaller to that ratio it means
that they can be in the water uh less
time before they get hypothermic so just
think about that they are just smaller
they can't defend their temperature for
a very long time but in this study they
saw that for up to I think it it was a
minute or so they could minute one
minute yeah I'm glad you mentioned
hypothermia and smaller bodied um people
children uh I used to do some um Pacific
uh ocean swims in the morning um without
wet suits and I adapted to it pretty
quickly and these are fairly long swim
and we brought an excellent swimmer with
us um a that was interning with me for a
while um is 16 years old at the time and
um very lean and um he wasn't small for
his age but he was smaller than us than
the it was all guys on the swim that day
Sometimes women join us um and he got
hypothermic um and he's an excellent
swimmer and he didn't report feeling
overly cold but um fortunately we got
him to Shore and heated him up again
um so he lived I don't think his
mother's going to ever let him go
swimming with us again he's thriving in
the world he's a university student now
um and he recalls that swim I mean this
is why you always want to Ocean swim
with a buddy with people um yeah he he
became hypothermic his teeth turned
yellow he was kind slurring his words he
wasn't making sense you know we got him
on the shore and he was kind of you know
drooling and a little bit semi euphoric
and then kind of you know it was um
hypothermia is no joke so I think yeah
so I I I'm really glad that this is
coming up because the cold is a powerful
stimulus and um and I and kids are at a
and smaller bodied people are at at
greater risk of hypothermia so a good
reason to approach it with caution maybe
start with cold showers get uh then cold
immersion and still water natural water
and open bodies of water of course are
always going to be um more dangerous for
other reasons currents and things of
that sort exactly okay I'm drowning yeah
so important note there um what about
any additional male female differences
or similarities that um we should be
aware of and this comes up all the time
on social media anytime I post anything
about a study it's what about women
because oftentimes there are differences
um yeah yeah and and and there are we we
also just talked about the difference in
in in temperature in men and women so it
means that if we did if we replicated my
study in women it could be that they
would have enough you can say cold
exposure with just 9 minutes per week it
could be because they H apparently are
also just colder and uh and they have
increased metabolism in their Brown fat
it's just they have more Brown fat it
could be but this is just something that
I I I I frankly don't know but women
also do cold exposure winter swimming
with the 11 minutes protocol I do it
myself and feel uh good about it so I
would say that um women Also regarding
activation of the brown fed it should be
the same um in theory but I don't know
if women actually do need to have
another protocol when it comes to this
rapid cold exposure I think that it's
another question if we are talking about
ice swimming when it comes to how far
can you be in the cold water without
getting hypothermic then there will be
differences in men and and and female
but but if you do this cold exposure for
a very brief amount of time which is
what I try to to talk to about talk
about the what we call also micr
stressing the body to to increase the
htic stress the healthy stress then this
is such a short amount of um exposure
that it it's fairly the same I think I
think women can look at this as a fairly
good protocol for for for them as well I
always say that if you really dread the
cold and um and don't like the cold then
you are a perfect candidate for using
deliberate cold exposure because the
sympathetic itic aka the stress response
will be greater and thereby the
adaptation to that shorter one or two
minutes is um is going to be much
greater right for people that are
perfectly comfortable in the cold it's
harder to get a an adaptation response
the same way that if somebody's very
strong and they can lift a very heavy
weight that that very heavy weight is
unlikely to evoke the same kind of or
same degree of of uh adaptive responses
if somebody is not quite as strong so
another reason to keep these exposures
relatively short and more frequent than
to do longer duration exposures
frequently however let's say somebody
only had two days a week um to do
deliberate cold exposure maybe they
don't have access to a sauna maybe they
do would you suggest that they get in
for one or two minutes then get out then
get back in for another couple of
minutes then get out and call that for
you know four or five minutes um to try
and get to that 11 minutes total per
week um as opposed to getting in for a
full 5 minutes um and then getting out
and coming back a second time that week
I know this is getting down into the
weeds but these are the sorts of things
that I think people really want to know
because not a lot of people either don't
live close to a body of water or don't
have a cold plunge um that they can do
this with although cold shower
apparently works too so most people live
close to a shower yeah as so definitely
I think the the changes in temperature
is what is strengthening your your cells
in the body so if you can do the short
amount of uh exposure and then get out
and get back in that is going to you can
say um um strengthen your cells because
you are challenging them to to adapt to
um changing temp temperatures so during
one session you can change this right
you you can do it if you are able to go
to cold water but also a SAA then you
just do it that automatically you will
have a change in temperature but you
could also do it where variating the
temperature in your Co plune if you have
if you have a plunge or if you have the
Open Sea or you have seasoning Seasons
even you have we have that in Denmark so
we have four seasons and the temperature
is going to vary with that so we have
nature who can just change this for us
and we don't have to think about it if
you have a cold plunge well then I would
say that changing the temperature is
what is going to create this romatic
stress and also keep your cells on its
toes you can say because you are try the
body will still
be um stressed to try to adapt to the
new temperature as it's seen as
something actually toxic to the body
right it's a small small piece of
toxicity that you are exposing yourself
to you don't have to swallow it but it's
enough that you touch it actually yeah
great uh great way to frame it um that
brings me back to this idea of circadian
time in your study you didn't um control
for specific time of day and now I'm
realizing that may be a great asset to
the whole thing so we know for instance
that our bodies go through pretty
dramatic shifts in temperature from the
time we wake up um our body starts
heating up as we wake up and um
continues to heat until the afternoon
and then starts to drop in the later
afternoon and then assuming all things
are working correctly um that body
temperature drops and we sleep so I
could imagine that doing deliberate cold
exposure at different times um just by
way of convenience or by way of
intention could be very beneficial
because my body temp is going to be
quite a bit warmer at one time of day
versus another and in that way keeping
the system tuned and that's really what
I keep hearing coming through in as you
explain these data and all these um
beautiful studies yours and others is
that it's not really about getting cold
it's about going from warm to cold and
from cold to warm it's not it and I love
this idea because I probably said this a
hundred times on my podcast and a
million times in my life and I'll
continue to which is that biology is not
an event it's a process like these these
um metabolic and Thermo regulatory
processes are indeed like the Turning of
a knob it's a verb yeah it's as opposed
to a noun and I and so I I think if
people can internalize that idea that
they're going to um have a lot more
flexibility a lot more fun and and get a
lot more benefit as opposed to thinking
okay I need to get into X degrees of
water for x amount of time on X number
of days you know in a very R way all the
time much and how cold and and I mean
it's it's just like well because we also
don't have studies showing exactly if
you just keep five degrees in your water
and you do that for a month then what
happens we maybe in the future we will
know much more about this and I'm I'm
sure it's going to come and I really
hope so but I just think by logically
changing that temperature up and down up
and down and you also do that in your
water it doesn't really it's not that
important what temperature you you will
have your water then then just keep
changing it going up and down it could
be all up to 12° C you're going to
activate your brown fat anyways I mean
12 uh 19° a cold air is enough to
activate your brown Foods so maybe we
don't have to go as cold as I think many
people think um and putting ice even all
the time you don't have to it's not I
don't think it's necessary to to expose
yourself to that cold uh temperature all
the time um but vary it a bit so keep
the system off balance and the way to
keep it tuned you mentioned a study that
is more recent or ongoing that's not
published um if you're willing um could
you share maybe some of the uh data from
that or findings from that study um with
of course the the cue to everybody that
these are not yet published data so that
the conclusions could change the data
could change for that matter yeah so we
we haven't analyzed all the data yet and
I I know from the study that we did
publish
that we we would need to look more at
the data so I don't really have any
results yet that I can share because we
are still in very preliminary analysis
of this so I I wouldn't know yet what to
exactly say about it but what we looked
at was both men and women we so that's
that's coming oh that's fantastic I um
that answer is going to please a great
number of people and and Intrigue
everybody so well listen I I want to
really thank you for coming here today
to talk about your work um and the
incredible direction that it points to
because I think that um you know no one
study is definitive but your study
really again stands as a landmark in the
landscape of exploring deliberate cold
exposure and heat how it can impact and
potentially impact our health because
frankly there just haven't been that
many um highresolution
uh detailed modern studies of this there
have been studies of sauna there have
been some studies of cold there are a
lot of groups in physiology that work on
um hypothermia and very cold exposure
but um most of the temperatures used in
those studies just aren't practical so
first of all I just want to thank you
for doing the work that you've done and
for the work that you continue to do I'm
um uh waiting with baited breath as they
say to um uh to hear the results of this
uh study that's ongoing on both men and
women so um we'll have to have you back
to to inform us about that soon and I
want to thank you for um the incredible
public education efforts that you've
been doing on social media um and with
respect to your book um and we of course
we'll put links to all of those things
in the show note caption so people can
learn from you and can continue to learn
from you we we certainly need more
scientists who are both experienced with
doing hardcore research as it's called
and who also do the practices I think
that's a wonderful additional asset you
know you're not just behind a lab Cod or
bundled up in a in a down uh in a down
feather jacket as everyone else is
getting in the cold you do these things
and that you are so open and generous in
the way that you share uh knowledge
which includes coming here today to to
share knowledge with me and uh our
audience so thank you ever so much
you're very welcome I am so pleased to
be here and thank you so much for
inviting me and I could explain my study
and I could share some of my insights
from from doing that so I'm very
grateful for being here delighted and
we'll have to have you back again thank
you for joining me for today's
discussion all about deliberate cold and
deliberate heat exposure science and
protocols with Dr Susanna soberg if
you'd like to learn more about Dr soberg
research or you would like to learn
about the research of her Institute The
soberg Institute please see the links in
the show note caption also in the show
note caption you can find a link to Dr
seberg's excellent book winter swimming
if you're learning from and or enjoying
this podcast please subscribe to our
YouTube channel that's a a terrific
zeroc cost way to support us in addition
please subscribe to the podcast on
Spotify and apple and in addition on
both Spotify and apple you can leave us
up to a five-star review if you have
questions for me or topics you'd like me
to cover on the hubman Lab podcast or
guests that you'd like me to consider
inviting on the hubman Lab podcast
please put that in the comments on
YouTube I do read all the comments in
addition please check out the sponsors
mentioned the beginning and throughout
today's episode that's the best way to
support this podcast not so much on
today's episode but on various previous
episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we
discuss supplements while supplements
aren't necessary for everybody many
people derive tremendous benefit from
them for things like enhancing sleep
focus and hormone support the hubman Lab
podcast is proud to have partnered with
momentous supplements if you'd like to
hear more about the supplements
discussed on the hubman Lab podcast
please go to Liv momentus spelled o
us.com huberman again that's liv.com
huberman if you're not already following
the huberman Lab podcast on social media
we are hubman lab on Instagram Twitter
Facebook and Linkedin and on all those
places I focus on material that somewhat
overlaps with content from the hubman
Lab podcast but often is distinct from
the content covered on the hubman Lab
podcast so again it's hubman lab on all
social media channels for those of you
that haven't already subscribed to our
so-called neural network newsletter this
is a completely zero cost monthly
newsletter that has summaries of podcast
episodes and so-called toolkits toolkits
are lists of about a page to two pages
long that give the critical tools for
instance for optimizing sleep or for
neuroplasticity or deliberate cold
exposure or deliberate heat exposure
optimizing dopamine again all available
to you at zero cost you simply go to
huberman lab.com go to the menu tab in
the corner scroll down to newsletter you
provide us your email we do not share
your email with anybody and in addition
to that there are samples of toolkits on
the hubin lab.com website again under
newsletter and you don't even have to
sign up to access those but I think most
people do end up signing up for the
newsletter because it's rich with useful
information and again completely zero
cost thank you once again for joining me
for today's discussion with Dr Susanna
soberg and last but certainly not least
thank you for your interest in science
[Music]