welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
[Music]
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Morgan howel
Morgan howel is a partner at the
collaborative fund and an expert in
private wealth generation and management
he is also the author of The
spectacularly bestselling book the
psychology of money and today we talk
about the psychology of money we talk
about how money can change your
psychology we talk about how most people
tend to lie at the extremes of either
saving too much money or spending too
much money and we talk about how most
people get it completely wrong when it
comes to framing in our minds what money
is what it's real value is in its
ability to generate happiness within us
and no I am not going to tell you and
Morgan is not going to tell you that
Beyond a certain dollar amount you don't
increase your happiness because as we
all know money cannot buy happiness but
it can buffer stress we acknowledge that
from the outset and then Morgan goes on
to explain that really what we're
seeking when we talk about seeking
wealth or money is freedom freedom is
really about independence and that if we
are constantly in pursuit of wealth well
then we are not truly free or
independent so today's discussion is as
much about being happy being free
feeling independent feeling free of
stress as it is about this thing that we
call money so in other words Morgan
explains not just how to generate and
manage money monetary wealth he explains
that but he also explains how to
organize your life in and around this
thing that we call career the pursuit of
wealth and happiness and I can think of
few topics as important as today's topic
I read Morgan's book the psychology of
money and I loved it I also love today's
discussion because I'm certain that
after it's done you will realize that
you've probably been thinking about
wealth and money incorrectly in a number
of ways and you've probably been
pursuing it incorrectly in a number of
ways but by asking yourself certain
probe questions that Morgan raises today
and answering those questions you can
arrive in a place where your
relationship to money and your pursuit
of it really clearly matches your
particular goals before we begin I'd
like to emphasize that this podcast is
separate from my teaching and research
roles at Stanford it is however part of
my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to Consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is wealthfront
I've been using wealthfront for nearly a
decade as my high yield cash account and
I absolutely love it personally I'm
sometimes hesitant to invest money given
the risks involved so I often prefer to
keep it in my wealthfront cash account
where I'm able to earn 4.25% annual
percentage yield on my deposits and you
can as well with wealthfront you can
earn 4.25% apy on your cash through
partner Banks until you're ready to
either spend that money or invest it
with wealth run you also get free same
day withdrawals to eligible accounts
every day day even on weekends and
holidays the 4.25% apy is not a
promotional rate there's no limit to
what you can deposit and earn and you
can even get protection of up to $8
million through FDIC Insurance provided
through wealth fronts partner banks for
same day withdrawals just start your
withdrawal as late as 900 p.m. Eastern
to one of over 550 eligible Banks and
Credit Unions to get it the same day and
it takes just a few minutes to transfer
your cash from the cash account to any
of wealth Run's automated investing
accounts when you're ready there are
already over a million people using
wealth front to save more earn more and
build long-term wealth earn 4.25% apy on
your cash today if you'd like to try
wealthfront go to wealthfront.com
huberman to receive a free $50 bonus
with a $500 deposit into your first cash
account that's wealthfront.com huberman
to get started now this has been a paid
testimonial of wealthfront wealthfront
brokerage isn't a bank the apy is
subject to change for more information
see the episode description today's
episode is also brought To Us by
betterhelp better help offers
Professional Therapy with a licensed
therapist carried out entirely online
now I've been doing weekly therapy for
well over 30 years initially I didn't
have a choice it was a condition of
being allowed to stay in school but
pretty soon I realized that therapy is
an extremely important component to
overall health now there are essentially
three things that great therapy provides
first of all it provides good rapport
with somebody that you can trust and
talk to about any and all issues you
want to second of all it can can provide
support in the form of emotional support
or directed guidance and third expert
therapy can provide useful insights with
better help they make it very easy for
you to find an expert therapist who you
resonate with and can provide you those
benefits that come through expert
therapy also because better help allows
for therapy to be done entirely online
it's very time efficient it's very easy
to fit into a busy schedule with no
commuting to your therapist office or
sitting in a waiting room or looking for
parking none of that it's all done
online if you'd like to try better help
go to betterhelp.com huberman to get 10%
off your first month again that's
betterhelp.com
huberman and now for my discussion with
Morgan howel Morgan howel welcome thanks
so much for having me happy to be here
I'm excited that you have a new book
coming out next year about the art of
spending money is that right that's
right you got it today I want to talk
about how to think about
money what is it how do we frame it
within our
historical context meaning our personal
historical context because I think we
all and each think about money a little
bit differently and then talk about what
is the best use or in some cases uh not
use of of money this is a topic that you
know could go in any number of different
directions but my goal here is that
people will get a better understanding
of what money is why they work for it
and really how to make it a true asset
to their lives as opposed to something
that um is forever Out Of Reach in terms
of amount or what they expect it to
bring them great looking forward to it
great so um your book starts off with
this notion that U people are not crazy
it's in fact the the title of the
chapter does that mean that people are
rational about money oh I think it's
very different what I meant by no one is
crazy is that it is so easy for people
to look around at society and how people
are spending their money and saving
their money and investing their money
and say why why the hell would anybody
do that why would you waste your money
on this why would you hoard your money
like that and actually think if you peel
back the onion layer of what's going on
in those people's lives no one is really
that crazy with how they spend their
money or save their money it makes sense
to them in that moment my brother-in-law
is a social worker he works with very
disadvantaged kids kids who are abused
at home who don't have homes and a lot
of those kids not surprisingly uh do
very poorly at school they misbehave
they get in fights they don't go to
school and it is so common for those
kids that the teacher will look at those
kids and say why why are you acting like
this why don't you do the right thing
it's so obvious and he says there's a
there's a phrase in social work all
Behavior makes sense with enough
information that if you look at what
those kids are dealing with in life it
would all make sense to you why they are
misbehaving at school and I think that's
a powerful idea for a lot of things in
life that all Behavior makes sense with
enough information and you can really
apply it to money too that you could
easily tie how I spend my money today
and save my money today based off of the
experience that I've had in life how I
was raised where I was raised how old I
am the generation I was born into all
things that are outside of my control
and it is very common to look at people
who are spending a ton of money well
that there's a story behind that they're
spending a ton of money because they
want some you know for a lot of them
they want some sort of attention they're
trying to get people's attention maybe
some times they're trying to cover up a
hole maybe they actually are really
enjoying it people who are hoarding a
lot of money there's a story there too
they EXP erence something that's causing
them to do that and I think this is
really important for two reasons one it
forces you to realize that there is not
one right way to manage money to save it
to spend it you got to figure out what
works for you and what works for me
might not work for you there's not one
answer and it's not like math like in
math 2 plus 2 equals 4 for everybody and
in money it's like you got to figure it
out for yourself it's almost like your
taste in food or your taste in music
like just find out what you like and do
that the other thing is I think you
become less cynical about other people's
decisions and you don't spend all your
day saying look at that idiot spending
their money in a stupid way no it's just
you got to figure it out for yourself
and I think you become happier when
you're a little less cynical about how
other people are doing it for most
people including myself the whole notion
of money and safety are very closely
linked you know do we have enough
resources to take care of ourselves plus
a bit extra one hopes I guess I would
include in taking care of oneself um
buffering one's anxiety about not having
enough money that's part of the
psychological care um and also taking
care of others that we might be
responsible for or simply want to take
care of that's very closely linked to
Notions of how much and what type of
education to get right I mean I think
everyone presumably at some point um
goes through the uh mental gymnastics of
is it worth it to get an advanced degree
What majors should I focus on is that
are there any jobs there when I went to
school to be a neuroscientist a
cardiologist a friend of our family said
why would you go into Neuroscience there
no jobs in that um there were plenty of
jobs in neuroscience and still are I
wouldn't say that most of them are
high-paying jobs so you know we know
that higher education doesn't always
scale with higher
income as we grow up and move into the
world you know we're thinking about how
to integrate all these different things
what we want to do because it's
interesting versus what will make us
money in your experience and observation
and in writing your book is there some
sort of path to to cut through these
different considerations I mean when we
talk about money and wealth you know
what should we really take into
consideration is there some sort of
checklist I mean it becomes a pretty
vast space um I believe that you get the
best work out of yourself uh in terms of
going after things you're really
interested in yeah but you know there
may not be money in um things that are
highly interesting to somebody I asked
Daniel conoman a very similar question
about 10 years ago conoman is a a
world-renowned psychologist won the
Nobel prize in economics passed away a
year or two ago and uh he said the trait
that you need to do well with money over
time no matter who you are is a
well-calibrated sense of your future
regret what are you going to end up
regretting in the past I think at the
highest level that's how you should base
all of your financial decisions is will
I regret spending this or not spending
this will I regret making or not making
this investment now much easier said
than done I think most people do not
fully understand their own sense of
regret what they're likely to look back
and say I wish I had not have done this
the other thing is that it changes over
the course of your life I'll give you a
perfect example I'm a big saver have
been for my entire adult life um what if
if heaven forbid if I were on my
deathbed tomorrow would I regret the
vacations I didn't take the cars I
didn't buy the answer right now is
absolutely not I would feel so good
knowing that my wife and kids are going
to be okay so I would take so much
pleasure in knowing that I did not spend
that I saved it for their protection
will I still feel that way if I'm 80
years old then maybe I will look back
and say I should have lived a little bit
more I should have given my money away
while I could have seen it being given
away so it changes throughout the course
of your life but I think if you're
always thinking through the lens of what
am I going to regret it's never about uh
YOLO or about like oh you know you know
safe you know safe today so so you can
have it for tomorrow it's I think that's
too too simple to think about it you
have to know what you're going to regret
in the the future and look back and back
to everyone's different what I will
regret might be very different from what
you will regret very interesting story
from Jeff Bezos he talked about when he
started Amazon back in I think it was
1994 the reason he started it and he
knew that there was very little chance
it was going to work uh when he first
started it but he said if I do not try
this I will regret it and if I try it
and it fails I won't regret that that's
an amazing story that talks about his
entrepreneurial Spirit the other thing
when I first heard that story is bless
him thinking that I do not have that
personality if I devoted my entire life
and my family's money and my parents
money to a startup and it failed I I I
might regret that I admire and I'm
grateful for the people who do not have
that Vision as he does made the world
better but everyone's sense of regrets
going to be a little bit
different and sometimes this sense of
what one is likely to regret if we have
access to it at all because it sounds
like we're not very good at anticipating
this as Conan pointed out um uh most
people lack a well- calibrated sense of
future regret that's going to change
over time so it's Dynamic and here we're
talking about investing in twoyear or
fouryear degrees we're talking about
investing in a one's time that is in uh
a particular profession and I think we
come up with all these
explanations uh post Hawk about well you
know I went to that uh company I went
into that line of work I spent 10 years
there or the the startup failed but I
learned a valuable lesson that then you
know uh really supported me in a future
Endeavor and so we rationalize our poor
choices from the past in ways that allow
us to you know connect the dots to sort
of steal from the the famous Steve Steve
Jobs speech um and yet all of this
really says that we are very poor at
placing our current experience and our
past experience into any kind of future
projection of ourselves you talk a
little bit about this in your book and
this really um you know sunk in for me
in a major way that we don't really know
or anticipate how we are likely to
change as we get older right so there's
a thing in Psychology call the end of
History illusion which means that you
are very aware of how much you've
changed in the last 20 years you are
maybe smarter wiser you have your
beliefs about things in life have
evolved uh and that's true for most
people but most people if you if you
actually dig into it they think if you
say who we who will you be in 20 years
from now they think they'll roughly be
the same person they are today there's
always this belief that I've have grown
so much in the past but I'm done growing
because you it's hard to project how
you're going to be different in the
future a lot of that is if I tell myself
20 years from now I'll have very
different beliefs about politics
whatever it might be what I'm
effectively admitting is what I believe
today is wrong and you don't want to
believe that everyone wants to wake up
and look in the mirror and say what I
believe today is the right thing it's
just like a self-justification of your
own beliefs to makes it easier to go
about the day what I believe right now
is the right thing and maybe you have a
little bit of Doubt around the edges but
most of it is what I believe is true so
you don't want to believe that you're
going to adjust and adapt those beliefs
over time so it becomes difficult to
take a truly long-term View and make a
decision today that is going to be
something that you're not going to
regret in the future as I've always
framed this I think the only antidote to
this of trying to get around this
problem is avoiding the extreme ends of
financial planning and a lot of people
are on the extreme ends like on one end
you have the fire movement these people
who save 90% of their income and they
want to retire at 28 kind of that kind
of thing and on the other hand you have
like the YOLO crypto traders who are
like doesn't matter like just throw it
all down and let's see what happens
those extreme ends are you are most
likely to regret at some point in the
future and the crypto look I think a lot
of those people are young and they have
time to make up for their mistakes I did
a lot of really dumb things with my
money in my teens and 20s but I think a
lot of them um that's where they are
most likely to look back you know it's
it's it's one thing to lose a lot of
money in your 20s and say ah it doesn't
really matter but then when you're 48
and trying to put your kids through
college that's when you're going to look
back and be like I wish I wouldn't I
wish I hadn't done something like that
so those extreme ends are like have the
highest odds of future
regret in order to as I described it
before carve a path through this for
people I'm wondering if people generally
fall into either one or the other
category of as you described with Bezos
you know not wanting to regret not
having done something okay so I think of
that in sort of pseudo neurobiological
terms as being drawn toward the possible
uh dopaminergic or other rewards of
having succeeded really that's what he's
envisioning presumably is um the pain of
having not having given himself the
opportunity to succeed yeah okay that's
uh one way to put it and then the other
path would be just avoiding the pain of
loss and there are a lot of studies I
think conmen did some of them in fact
that people work a lot harder to avoid
the pain of loss than to gain something
but in thinking about the people I know
of across various wealth scales and
different ages it seems that some people
are just more motivated to try new
things because they like doing new
things they like the sense of reward
that can come from doing those things
and so it really is painful for them to
stay in the same place financially or
otherwise other people they like the
sure thing they like reliability and you
can see this in a lot of domains of
their life I mean I don't want to
extrapolate this to all aspects of their
life but you know some people like dogs
that you know entire breed would uh you
know is known for rarely ever having
bitten somebody other people like to
raise K coros and while I'm sure there's
some really nice loving can coros out
there they occasionally bite it when
they bite it serious so you know are we
really talking about a propensity for
risk versus safety and do you think that
people fall into more or less two camps
on that I think it's it's it's true that
some people would go nuts if they took
the safe path and even if they're doing
it in the name of like I don't want to
regret this but they need some sort of
variability in their life they need to
go out and do things the other element
is we don't know the paths that we
didn't take and I'll give you a personal
example of this uh 20 years ago I was
enrolled in Pepperdine uh but I didn't
go I was enrolled and just at the last
second I transferred so I never actually
attended but I was all enrolled and of
course I think what would my life have
been if I had gone there because the
school that I transferred to I met my
wife started my career there and it's
easy for me to say God I'm so glad I did
not go there cuz my life would not what
it is today but the truth is maybe it
would have been fine may it would have
been better you you you you never know
the paths that you didn't take where
they're going to end up so back to con's
point a well calibrated sense of your
future regret but nobody knows the past
that they didn't take and where those
would go so it it just makes it very
difficult to have any idea of of which
which path you should be on uh in that
end so I I think just avoiding those two
camps of the extreme ends of it but
again as I said earlier I think that is
actually more than half of people are on
some sort of extreme end of spending way
more than they can or saving way more
than they need to there's there's a fat
tail distribution in how people manage
their money and so that's quite a few
people and I think that's why I think
it's one of the reasons why we live in a
society that is richer than it's ever
been by far not just at the top but at
the median level the average family is
richer than they've ever been but
because we manage it in such Extreme
Ways is it making people happier are we
happier today than we were 40 years ago
or 100 years ago that there's not a ton
of evidence for because managing it in
way that's actually going to make you
happier and reduce your regret and live
a more meaningful life is much harder
than earning it and accumulating it over
time when I was growing up you would see
a mixture of newer cars including some
very nice cars as well as a lot of older
kind of beaten up cars driving around
nowadays of course this varies by area
it's actually rare to see really old
beat up cars you see some really nice
old cars that have been restored but
that's a different thing all together
and I assume this is because of credit
that people can now buy things on credit
how has the ability to purchase things
on credit change the way that we think
about money generally I know people who
have tremendous credit card debt and I
think are now at the point where they
figure that they're never going to pay
it off yeah they're just going to
probably not live long enough to pay it
off and they're sort of comfortable with
that which is kind of scary to see and
some of them aren't even particularly
Big Spenders they just acred this debt
early enough and they seem to get out
from the trap of that I know other
people who you know like myself pay off
my credit card bill every month I'm like
you know I hate the whatever it is 18
plus% interest even if I'm one day late
I'm like you know and and at the same
time I'm not somebody who likes to
purchase many things I'm not a things
guy I you know I own you know one or two
watches one truck like I'm just not a
things guy but I certainly have my own
psychological relationship with money
that after talking to you today I'm sure
I'm going to realize is not optimized
either right so it's easy to point
fingers at people in these different
groups but going back to this issue of
credit yeah how has the ability to own
and use things that we don't really
truly
own basically to exceed our income level
in terms of the number and type of
luxuries that we can enjoy change the
way that people think about money and
use money because today's discussion in
your book we're talking about money as
if it's something that we have but
credit basically is living outside your
means by definition I think the
knee-jerk response would be oh it helps
you pull your consumption forward so you
can have more toys that you would not
have had in a different era and actually
think for a lot of people it's the
opposite that there are a lot of people
that have holes in their life challenges
in their life and a very easy answer if
you if you're not happy with your life
and you have a hole you're trying to
fill is well if I had more money this
problem would go away and in previous
generations previous decades you could
not just go out and have a ton of more
money you you earned your money from
your paycheck that was what you had
today it makes it easier to try to fill
that hole in your life with money and so
you can keep on getting more and more
and more and for a lot of people they
will wake up and say oh if only I had
that car my life would be better and
they go buy that car and they still feel
the same so it's like ah you know what
if I had that car and that watch then
I'd feel better they get the watch they
feel the same ah you know what's missing
the house I got to go get that fancy
house it's a continuous spiral and since
you can Finance all of that it makes it
easier and easier to go on that spiral
Will Smith SM made this incredible
realization I loved from his biography
he said when he was uh poor and
depressed he had hope cuz he could tell
himself one day I'm going to have money
and all these problems will go away and
then when he was rich and depressed he
was still depressed and he lost all of
his hope because he he had more money
than he could ever spend so he could not
tell himself if only I had more money
these problems would go away and so for
a lot of people the availability of
credit is giving them I think a false
sense of hope that's keeping them on
this on this hamster wheel of if only I
had this bigger house this nicer car all
these problems that I wake up with every
morning would go away and it keeps you
on that path which I think if you
actually don't have access to that much
money you're more likely to wake up and
say what is this hole I need to fix it
in a different way it's Health it's
relationships its purpose whatever it
might be rather than trying to put a
bandid of credit over it so interesting
I sometimes think about the phrase money
can't buy happiness and my immediate
impulse is to respond with well somebody
with a lot of money probably said that
not because I think money can buy
happiness but money can buffer stress I
have friends who've had children
recently who have night nurses they're
looking a lot more rested than the ones
that don't because they can't afford
them uh and on and on if you have a
medical issue right I mean there's this
whole world within hospitals that uh we
won't talk about in this episode but
there's this whole world about wealth
and how one is actually even treated as
a person in a hospital mhm there's a lot
of knowledge behind the scenes about
people's income level when they come
into a hospital people are going to go
wide-eyed when they hear this they'll
get shuttled to different rooms
different conditions that allow them to
sleep better recover Better Health
outcomes depend on this I mean and on
and on so money can't buy happiness but
it certainly can buffer stress and it
can drive outcomes so how should we
frame that especially if we are on the
um or in the pursuit of acquiring More
Money More wealth because lot of people
are money absolutely can buy happiness
it's often though an indirect path and
what I mean by that is will a big fancy
house make you happier and the answer is
probably yes but the reason it might is
because it'll make it more it'll make it
easier to host friends and family and
that's what's actually making you happy
it's those those extra connections with
those people does going on a nice
vacation make you happy an expensive
vacation yes because you're going to
form memories with your kids with your
spouse with your friends while you're
there that's what's making you happy so
you can't say that money doesn't make
people it does it obviously does the
other thing that's important is what
really makes people happy in their core
is some sense of purpose there's a great
quote from the movie Boiler Room where
he says people who say money doesn't buy
happiness don't have any I think that I
think there's a lot of Truth to that
that people who become richer say of
course I was happier now than I was when
I was poor of course I would never want
to go back there but often what's
happening is the reason that you are
happier when you were rich is because
the reason you got rich is because you
found some sort of purpose you built a
business you were successful in your
career career and that gave you a good
sense of purpose and identity and where
you see the opposite of that are lottery
winners who become rich but not because
they made a good investment not because
they built a business not because
they're successful and their peers like
them and whatnot they just got lucky and
those are the people so many studies
that winning the lottery will not make
you happy it might for a very short
period of time but over time it doesn't
because you didn't get any added purpose
you can't wake up in the morning and say
I built this business I did it I you
know I'm so successful I got my PhD I
did there's none of that you just got
lucky and so that's not going to bring
you much happiness so money does make
you happier I think it can for everybody
if you learn how to spend it in your
personality and whatnot uh spending a
lot of it spending a ton of money can
make you happier I think I think there's
almost no limit to it but it's different
for everybody and it's often a
roundabout way I think a lot about this
when if I go on an expensive vacation
with my kids let's say that's a that's a
10 that's a 10 out of 10 in terms of
just happiness memories and whatnot but
actually what was making me happy was
spending uninterrupted time with my kids
so staying home and playing Legos on the
living room floor with them that might
be like an eight and a half because
because that's what's making me happy
you just have to figure out like the
actual purpose I think a good formula
for a pretty good life at the simplest
level is Independence plus purpose you
need to have a purpose that is bigger
than yourself that you are chasing
family religion work whatever it might
be different for everybody you need and
you need to have the independence to
make sure you can do it on your own
terms rather than chasing somebody
else's goal
that's at the highest level of
psychological well-being Independence
and purpose and money is not one of
those things but you can easily see how
money can help those things money brings
you Independence it can allow you to
find your purpose in a bigger way you're
not chasing you're not you're not at
your boss's whim you can do whatever you
want you're independent so using money
as a tool can make you happier spending
money can make you happier but it's not
the thing that is making you happier
it's just a tool to do other things and
acquire other things that are actually
making you happy I'd like to take a
quick break and acknowledge our sponsor
ag1 by now many of you have heard me say
that if I could take Just One supplement
that supplement would be ag1 the reason
for that is ag1 is the highest quality
and most complete of the foundational
nutritional supplements available what
that means is that it contains not just
vitamins and minerals but also
probiotics prebiotics and adaptogens to
cover any gaps you may have in your diet
and provide support for a demanding life
for me even if I eat mostly Whole Foods
and minimally processed foods which I do
for most of my food intake it's very
difficult for me to get enough fruits
and vegetables vitamins and minerals
micronutrients and adaptogens from food
alone for that reason I've been taking
ag1 daily since 2012 when I do that it
clearly bolsters my energy my immune
system and my gut microbiome these are
all critical to brain function mood
physical performance and much more if
you'd like to try ag1 you can go to
drink a1.com huberman to claim their
special offer right now they're giving
away five free travel packs plus a year
supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's
drink a1.com huberman to claim that
special offer today's episode is also
brought To Us by Roa Roka makes
eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of
the absolute highest quality I'm excited
to share that Roa and I have teamed up
to create a new style of red lens
glasses these red lens glasses are meant
to be worn in the evening after the sun
goes down they filter out short
wavelength light that comes from screens
and from LED lights sorts of LED lights
that are most commonly used as overhead
and frankly lamp lighting nowadays I
want to emphasize Roa red lenss glasses
are not traditional blue blockers
they're not designed to be worn during
the day and to filter out blue light
from screen light they're designed to
prevent the full range of wavelengths
that suppress melatonin secretion at
night and that can alter your sleep so
by wearing Roa red lens glasses they
help you calm down and they improve your
transition to sleep most nights I stay
up until about 10: p.m. or even midnight
night and I wake up between 5: and 7:00
a.m. depending on when I went to sleep
now I put my Roa red lens glasses on as
soon as it gets dark outside and I've
noticed a much easier transition to
sleep which makes sense based on
everything we know about how filtering
out shortwave lengths of light can allow
your brain to function correctly Roa red
lens glasses also look cool frankly you
can wear them out to dinner or to
concerts or out with friends so it turns
out it is indeed possible to support
your biology to be scientific about it
and to remain social after all if you'd
like to try try Roa go to roka.com
that's
r.com and enter the code huberman to
save 20% off your first order again
that's r.com and enter the code huberman
at checkout I love the story about
spending time with your kids on vacation
as unstructured time as well as spending
unstructured time with them playing
Legos at home my graduate adviser sadly
passed away very young of cancer she was
50 and I knew her kids really when they
were in the womb CU she was pregnant
with the first one and I attended the
memorial service there and um it was an
incredible thing because people gave up
gave their speeches and um and her kids
got up and by then they were I think you
know about 8 and 11 or so
and I'm sure they had a great many
thoughts and feelings that they didn't
share but the one thing that really
stood out is they appreciated how much
unstructured time their mom had spent
with them it wasn't this like big event
or something it was all the unstructured
time that she had spent with them and
that was very inherent to the kind of
person she was and so that really stuck
with me and God willing you live a very
long time but I think for anyone
listening to this and because of the
statement that conman made where that we
are not well calibrated to sense a
future regret you know that unstructured
time is perhaps one of the most valuable
things that we can give our
relationships both the people we engage
in them with and ourselves and it's I
don't think it's I don't think it's
disgusted enough there's a a
gerontologist named Carl pmer who wrote
a book great book called 30 lessons for
living and what he did is he interviewed
about a 100 centenarians and he just
said tell me about your life what what
you know what what advice do you have
for the rest of us and there's a section
of his book about money and he says of
the of the thousand people there a
thousand people he interviewed of the
10,000 centenarians he interviewed not a
single one of them looking back at their
lives said I wish I earned more money
not one but virtually every one of them
said I wish I spent more time with my
kids I wish I was nicer to people I wish
I spent more time with my friends my
family that was Universal but earn more
money was not in there whatsoever that
stuck with me mhm and as you point out
however earning money allows for the
opportunity to spend time with kids and
loved ones of all kinds it can but I
think there are a lot of people for whom
it's the opposite if you are a partner
at a law firm you're earning a ton of
money congratulations great you proba
have a big house and a nice car you're
also probably working 100 hours a week
and the things that might fill your soul
it's different for everybody this is not
Universal but what might actually make
you happy spending time with your
friends your family exercising sleeping
late uh is not available to you so
that's why it's Independence plus
purpose and I think there are a lot of
people who make millions of dollars per
year and have no Independence whatsoever
they're completely tied to their boss's
whims to their work to their employer
they might love it I'm not saying you
shouldn't do that but they have no
Independence at all I think there are
billionaires who have no Independence
because they are so tied to doing things
whether they like it or not and that's I
think a lot of people go crazy in that
situation because they're like I'm
making $5 million a year but it's not
making me any happier it's like yeah
what what would make you happier is
independence and you are pushing ping
yourself away from that you were
probably more independent when you were
15 and had no money than you are at 40
making millions of dollars a
year so then in an Ideal World which of
course doesn't exist one would find a
vocation or a Pursuit that they found
really meaningful would work really
really hard would make enough money to
then I guess retire and spend
unstructured time with the people you
love and then simply stop working in
this model that clearly is an artificial
model that I'm creating here um because
it seems like after a certain point
provided you earned that money through
an effort that you felt was
meaningful um presumably with people you
enjoy or even if it wasn't you found it
meaningful you make that money then it
seems that it's all about human
interactions at that point yeah and
what's what's true is that that that
scenario that that you know dream
scenario might be true for 1% of the
people that they can earn enough money
to retire young and then pursue whatever
they want there's an entrepreneur named
Felix Dennis who wrote A book many years
ago called how to get rich and there's a
quote in that book he says he was at the
time maybe in his 70s and worth about a
billion dollars something like that and
he said if I knew what I knew now and I
could do life over again I would make as
much money as I could retire at age 35
and plant trees and write poetry and
he's like looking back that's that's
what I should have done is do but let's
leave aside that of course not everybody
can do that what he do he kept working
he kept working even though he didn't
need more money absolutely this is
interesting because people who do
achieve a high degree of wealth at a
young age seem to keep going and we
could make all sorts of assumptions
about why it is that they do that
expectations that they uh from others um
that their ego uh literally their sense
of self in some way or perhaps entirely
is um is tied to the sense that they're
still in Pursuit um that it's somehow a
failure to opt out at that point yeah um
I mean we can speculate all day but um
what this guy Felix said really Rings
true it seems like once people reach
number and it for everyone it's going to
be different it's not going to be a
billion dollars for everybody once they
have enough resources for themselves and
the people they need to take care of
maybe a bit more as a buffer it makes no
sense to continue on that path well I
think there are a lot of people I think
you're one of them and I'm one of them
who enjoy what they do and if you and I
got to a point where we're completely
financially independent all the money
we'll need for the rest of our life I
would still be a writer you would still
do your research because we enjoy it
absolutely it's not just right and I
think if actually if you are the kind of
person who says once I hit my number I'm
done you probably don't love your work
at all almost by definition you don't uh
I think what's dangerous though is when
the money itself is part of your
identity I like being a writer I like
the process of writing but if I were to
say I have to keep writing books because
I need to make more money I just I have
to have a higher net worth particularly
if I'm past the point of taking care of
my family then at that point I think
money is actually like a liability it's
a financial asset and a psychological
liability it's taking control over what
you're doing in life if you're saying I
have to have more of it I mean if
there's anything in life where you're
like I I have to have more and even when
I get more my satiation point goes
higher and higher what is that it's an
addiction and that's it's controlling
you at that point so there are a lot of
people for whom money is a financial
asset and a psychological liability and
I think that's actually true for some of
the richest people in society that the
more like it it grows exponentially over
time the Richer you become the more
addicted to having more grows on you in
the backdrop of everything we've talked
about thus far is the biology of dope
reward um dopamine of course being a
molecule that people associate with
reward but it's really about the pursuit
of reward it's about more it's about and
it's it's no coincidence that dopamine
is involved in generating movement in
the body this is why people with
Parkinson's who are depleted in dopamine
can't generate movement and it's also
involved in generating cognitive
movement and pursuit paying attention to
things there is this idea uh that I've
been pushing for a few years now that
kind of throws its arms around a big
literature on dopamine that says that
addiction is a progressive narrowing of
the things that bring you pleasure but
your definition is actually much better
I
realize addiction is a progressive
narrowing of the things that bring you
pleasure and or safety or a sense of
safety yeah right because here we're not
talking about making more money to enjoy
things more we're talking about making
more money to avoid the sense that pain
is coming or that we are vulnerable and
for a lot of people that pain is a
social pain that they not going to climb
high enough on the social ladder that
their peers are earning more than them
that their neighbors have a bigger house
whatever it might be that's the pain
that they're trying to avoid and that is
a game that cannot be won because
gratefully thankfully there are a lot of
very wealthy people in this world and no
matter how much money you're making
there's already some there's always
somebody out there who's earning more
living better and has bigger house and a
nicer car that's always the case so if
you are on that path of I need to earn
more to climb that ladder so I can have
more than the next guy mean that's
that's a game that you cannot win and I
I think that game of comparison too also
grows the wealthier you are that you are
the billionaires are more likely to
compare themselves to other billionaires
than the minimum wage worker is to
compare themselves to somebody making
$10 an hour or whatever it's you are
more likely to compare your lifestyle
the Richer you become and since that
comparison to other people is what gives
you a feeling of inadequacy there's this
irony it's hard to wrap your head around
it and come to terms with it but some of
the most money insecure people you'll
ever meet are the richest people you'll
ever meet people who live in a 15,000 ft
Mansion yeah but he's got a 17,000 ft
Mansion things that Ordinary People
would never consider that just consumes
their life and again that's the point
where money is like the psychological
debt it's psychological liability it's
controlling their it it becomes an
integral part of their identity they
wake up in the morning and look in the
mirror and they see uh a person who
makes money that's their identity who
are you I'm a person who makes money and
that's when like your process of chasing
it just becomes like a detriment to your
happiness over time you're not using it
as a tool to live a better life you're
using it as a yard stick to measure
yourself against others
by I fundamentally believe that all
forms of addiction all forms of
addiction are fundamentally a fear of
death their way of shrinking our uh
aperture on time perception so that
we're in pursuit of something and for
people that can place their addiction
within work it has this feedback of
being quote unquote functional as
opposed to dysfunctional this is also
true for people that are continually uh
seeking Awards within their profession I
mean there these professions Academia
included but other professions where
people are constantly pinning Awards on
one another and it gives this illusion
of progress when in fact there's a whole
world of things happening now these
people often have quite healthy families
and relationships so they're not
mutually exclusive but you know I think
I know a few billionaires not not many
but I know some that are very happy they
tend to be the people that are still
working and in pursuit of new things
Avid learners but perhaps by virtue of
the work that I do which is focused on
science but also Health you know the
modern billionaires that I'm aware of
seem to be very focused on not just
making money but also trying to secure
their place on the planet for a very
long time not through Legacy although I
think many of them like to provide for
the next Generations in their family
surely not So Much by putting their
names on the sides of buildings anymore
this used to be the way it was done but
rather trying to secure their health
status because the one thing that money
can buy sort of is better health care
right but money can't buy you more years
of your life except by virtue of the
things that you are willing to not do
and do behaviorally yeah you still have
to exercise you still have to get your
sleep you have to avoid certain things
um and so the modern billionaires
often are talking about what they're
doing for their health as opposed to
their yacht their car Etc this has now
become the kind of metric for comparison
blood profiles become a sort of point of
bragging for people it's pretty
interesting uh especially given that you
just look back about 50 or even 100
years and and further back and the more
wealthy people were the less physical
labor they were doing now they're doing
more physical labor to try and live
longer so what are your thoughts on the
on the relationship between physical
health and and money I mean obviously
there's a there's a sweet spot there but
um there's no pill that people can
purchase to live longer right I I I view
it in the negative sense of the people
who work to get money so hard that it
takes a physical toll on their body and
that is so incredibly common and that's
another form of debt that you can very
easy you can easily measure your net
worth and your income you could put a
number on it very clean to measure how
do you me it's much harder to measure
your health and it's I think it's easier
for people to say yes I'm Only Sleeping
5 hours a night and I'm I'm getting I'm
I'm on my third divorce and I'm
overweight but I'm making a lot of money
this year because one is very easy to
measure and the others are are much
harder your happiness your health what
not it's harder to measure that and I I
I do think too that if you are very
wealthy particularly the very very
wealthy you get so accustomed towards I
can snap my fingers and literally get
anything a golf stream jet a mansion
whatever I I I can get it right now but
health is like this last elusive thing
that's going to that by and large you
cannot purchase and I think that drives
a lot of people crazy and that's why if
you can have anything in the world by
snapping your fingers and getting it
then you eventually move towards what's
the thing that you don't have and that's
immortality and I think that's there's a
long history of that going back to the
Robert Barons uh John de Rockefeller was
obsessed with it Andrew Carnegie was
obsessed with it if you can have
everything material in the world you're
still going to have desire and ordinary
people can sit around and dream and say
one day I'm going to have the Mansion
we're not even a mansion one day I'm
going to have a house of my own I'm
going to have a car I'm going to send my
kids to college everybody wants to dream
so if all that is a given you have all
the money you could ever spend you still
want a dream so what do you dream about
you dream about immortality and so I
think that's that's been the case for a
very long period of time what's
interesting too is that there was a uh
there was a historian who looked back at
the British purage he got a lot of data
on how long people lived in uh in
various points of the UK economy and
what he found was until about I think it
was 1750 the richest members of the UK
had among the shortest lives the poorest
people were some of them who are living
longest and he dug into it like how
could this be the richest people die the
fastest and what he found is the richest
people were the only ones who could
afford all the quack medicines and the
Sham doctors who were just poisoning
them they were poison ends to back in
the day when we knew nothing about
medicine so I think the idea of of I
want a better life and I should be able
to buy that like there's a long history
of that backfiring on people as well
yeah there's a lot of excitement right
now about stem cells and treatments that
currently are not available in the
United States that are are available out
of country and um I get asked about
these a lot most of them don't have FDA
approval yet um some of them probably
never will have FDA approval uh we'll
probably talk about stem cells another
time do you think you see this though
where the wealthiest people are spending
money on treatments that you either know
or not going to work or are a very
questionable yeah work all the time and
and that might backfire on you that
might make you less healthy oh
absolutely I mean I'll just point out I
don't have anything against stem cell
therapies I think they hold great
potential
um but there is a true story about a
stem cell Clinic down in Florida prior
to the FDA um you know bringing the
gavel down on them of injecting stem
cells into the eyes of wealthy people
who could afford the treatment um these
people had certain markers for uh
macular degeneration and other things
that can cause blindness and guess what
happened to these people they all went
blind right so that brought the gel down
on stem cell therapy generally in this
country a lot of people are getting
infusions of stem cells and related
things um out of country they're coming
back and they're walking and talking so
um and they're calling me and they're
asking what what my thoughts are and I
have a lot of thoughts I mean I think
that the the basics of longevity are
clear right I mean you want to avoid you
know head trauma and environmental
toxins those things are real and and um
if you have certain mutations like braa
mutations you know you need to be more
careful about cancer and avoid smoking
all the stuff right alcohol turns out to
be pro pro cancerous and things of that
sort but then it's you know it's
physical activity it's nutrition it's
social connection it's sleep it's
sunlight it's you know it's all the
things that I've talked about in this
podcast and that other people talk about
as well but yes very wealthy people are
looking for that edge uh to live longer
and it is true that when you start to
layer in all the basics of dos and
don'ts all all the behaviors and then
you start to augment that with a few
extra things you get the sense of more
Vigor that sort of suggests they may
live longer but you we we still don't
know right we still don't know with the
exception of exercise that we absolutely
know can enrich mitochondrial density
give people more energy and vigor Etc um
you know most most of this is still a
big question mark see I I could see uh a
very wealthy person using their money if
you are very sick and you have a rare
cancer to throw the kitchen sink at it
every excellent those those those
million dollar therapies or what not
absolutely I think it's a different
animal if you are already pretty healthy
to say I'm going to throw my money at
trying to be become immortal or close to
it whatever it might be that's that's
that's a different thing uh I totally
agree and and I think what we're talking
about here is as you said it fairly
quickly but I think I want to highlight
it um because I think it's really
important that even people who have
billions of dollars still have a sense
of of Yearning For for something that's
missing yeah or that they don't have and
in some cases that's the sustaining
factor to their well-being you say it's
also good to be in Pursuit right maybe
that's with dopamine too right we we
always want more it's it's the pursuit
of more and if you're wealthy enough to
have everything you still have a a part
of your brain it's like yeah but I want
more I want more I want more and if
you've exhausted the physical part of
the world that material part of the
world and let's leave aside the
billionaires even the average ordinary
American family that owns a modest house
owns a car that functions well owns nice
clothes will send their kids to a state
school by a lot of historical
definitions they have everything they
have everything you would ever need but
you're always yearning for more it's
always is this pursuit of well what else
don't I have and I think nothing you
what you want more than anything in life
is what you want and cannot have that's
what you're going to chase with all of
your effort is a thing that you want and
cannot have I think that that that's
where health comes in for a lot of these
people as long as you think that there's
a possibility you could get it the uh
the dopamine circuit loves you want what
you feel is just out of your reach but
might be possible to achieve I mean this
is why people throw so much money away
gambling but maybe with social media it
makes it seem so that there are
virtually anything is within your reach
because it used to be before social
media that your view of the world was
mostly your neighbors and your
co-workers and your siblings and now
everybody's view of the world is a
curated highlight real of the most
extreme events in the world so if you
are a 15-year-old scrolling through in
Instagram then what is within your reach
what looks within your reach is a
Ferrari and a private jet and a mansion
in a way that didn't exist when you and
I were kids and I think it it makes the
aspiration level that much harder and
real examples of people who went from
nothing to immensely popular or wealthy
Etc I mean gosh I would say about once a
month somebody walks right up to me and
says just watch Someday I'm gonna have
the top podcast in the world on blank
and they they're trying to seed this
thing that they've seen on social media
which are examples of people you know
kind of it used to be called rags to
riches but you know they parallels in
different universes but there's a famous
musician I think his name is Ed Sheeran
who there's still a video of him early
on saying like he knew he was going to
make it if you watch the Conor McGregor
documentary it's amazing I think it's
called notorious on Netflix even if
people aren't into to MMA they should
they should at least watch the first
part he was videotaping himself very
early on and he made this prediction
that he was going to be a world champion
and then he ends up being a world
champion right um this is great anecdote
that Kanye West used to practice his
Grammy speech when he was walking to the
train because he couldn't afford the car
like when he was an absolute nobody he
was practicing his Grammy acceptance
speech of just like absolute ambition of
where you're going yeah and I don't know
if this anecdote is true but there's the
the anote that I heard that you know
Matt Damon and um uh Ben Affleck
practicing their Academy Awards AC
acceptance speech on the school in the
schoolyard when they were kids and then
they gave their speech and they were you
know laughing about that I grew up
skateboarding so the when I first got
into it the the Tony Hawks and the Mike
mcgills and Steve cavaleros these were
the names at the time where like these
these luminaries right the gap between
us and Them was so huge by time I was a
junior in high school my best friend at
the time Paul zuanic sent in a videotape
of himself to a company called planet
Earth he got sponsored next thing you
know we're in the shop watching him
skateboard and within a year or two he
had his own PR model yeah so you I think
social media gives us not just the sense
of what's out there but it gives us very
Salient examples of people that went
from completely unknown to extremely
known just this last year there's the uh
you know the so Haw Tu a girl you know
it's interviewed outside a bar something
like she now has a very popular podcast
she has sponsors she's known literally
became one of the most famous people in
the country right and and has a
financial stream now of of income to
through her podcast and so this raises
the the the sort of idea and people's
minds or the the possibility however
remote that if somebody puts a camera in
front of you by virtue of one thing that
you say you could suddenly be a inter
internationally known person and
potentially go from quote unquote rags
to riches and if you look at the studies
when you ask teenagers what is your uh
preferred career what do you want to be
when you grow up it used to be astronaut
used to be doctor used to be
entrepreneur now it's influencer by far
is what people want to be it seems like
the quickest path to fame and wealth and
for a lot of people it is my
sister-in-law is a kindergarten teacher
she has a girl in her class who has over
a million followers on YouTube as a
kindergartener like that that that
didn't exist when you and I were kids or
it was so rare but now like like enough
people know stories like that if there
are a few of them enough people know
stories to give you the sense of hope of
like well if they could do it I could do
it too well I'll tell everyone out there
that um if you think that uh Fame is
what you want um Fame restricts your
freedom it does not increase your
freedom there's a great quote from Nal
where he says what you want to be is
Rich and Anonymous that's the sweet spot
that you want to be the opposite you are
poor and famous uh and that's that's the
hardest spot to be in but if you can be
rich and anonymous because I think
there's a a a really important concept
with money that I call social debt
which is when the money that you have
influences it changes how other people
think of you and even may maybe how you
think about yourself and you can measure
your asset it's not it's not actually
debt like it's not like debt you repay
the bank but is very much a debt in
terms of it is an anchor on your
happiness that you have to repay and
fame is the ultimate social debt and for
a lot of people their social debt of
Fame is more than the money that they
made from whatever made them famous to
begin with and there's this anecdote
from Tiger Woods where he said
he loves scuba diving because when he's
100 feet under the ocean is the only
time in the world where people aren't
taking pictures of him and asking things
of him and gawking at him like that's
that sucks that's not that you have a
lot of sympathy for somebody like that
but it does suck like you can measure
his net worth very quickly what's your
net worth just show me the number how do
you measure the liability of feeling
like you have no privacy unless you are
scuba diving that's a that's a hard
thing and at various levels a lot of
people have that even if you are uh earn
a modest income and all a sudden your
friends your family start saying hey I
could you know I heard you got a raise I
could I could use a little bit myself
that's a social debt they want you to
pay at dinner and whatnot and of course
maybe you're happy to do that you're
happy to share it but let's not pretend
that there's not a little bit of social
debt and liability that comes with every
added amount of income that you have I
mean so much of social media is just by
definition in terms of the the number of
followers being displayed Etc a number
of likes and comments being displayed is
is designed to set up these metrics of
comparison yeah the smartest minds of
the generation work at Facebook and
Instagram and Twitter to figure out how
to give you fomo how to generate a
little bit more dopamine and they're
very good at it I'd like to take a quick
break and thank one of our sponsors
function I recently became a function
member after searching for the most
comprehensive approach to lab testing
while I've long been a fan of blood
testing I really wanted to find a more
in-depth program for analyzing blood
urine and saliva to get a full picture
of my heart health my hormone status my
immune system regulation my metabolic
function my vitamin and mineral status
and other critical areas of my overall
health and vitality function not only
provides testing of over 100 biomarkers
key to physical and mental health but it
also analyzes these results and provides
insights from Top Doctors on your
results for example in one of my first
tests with function I learned that I had
two high levels of mercury in my blood
this was totally surprising to me I had
no idea prior to taking the test
function not only helped me detect this
but offered medical doctor informed
insights on how to best reduce those
mercury levels which included limiting
my tuna consumption because I'd been
eating a lot of tuna while also making
an effort to eat more leafy greens and
supplementing with Knack and acetyl
cysteine both of which can support
glutathione production and
detoxification and worked to reduce my
mercury levels comprehensive lab testing
like this is so important for health and
while I've been doing it for years I've
always found it to be overly complicated
and expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the tests done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function health.com huberman function
currently has a weight list of over
250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to huberman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to
function one thing that um I wish
somebody would do maybe it's been done
is you mentioned earlier this uh not
typical but I guess semic commmon thing
of an article will come out and say you
know that the five things that um people
say on their deathbed or that they and
they look back and they mentioned that
they wish they'd spent less time at work
they wish they' spent more time with
their kids or more time in nature
perhaps has anyone ever just asked
people directly um what were the things
that they are most proud of or the
things that they really feel brought
them tremendous meaning then and as
they're passing away uh because it's
it's it's related but it's kind of the
inverse of the same question yeah Warren
Buffett brought this up one time he said
a good way to think about life is uh
it's it's it's kind of grim but he said
write what you want your obituary to say
and then work backwards to live up to it
and in that situation if you were to
write like what do you want your
obituary to say most people would say oh
I I hope it says Morgan was a good
father he was a good husband he helped
his community he was admired by his
co-workers that's what I wanted to say
and for a lot of people it's different
for everyone but it' be something like
that and why Buffett said it was
important is because nobody who's
writing their preferred obituary would
say uh would uh include the size of
their house how many horsepower their
their car had how nice their clothes
were because everybody knows it doesn't
matter and it's like uh forget who made
this idea there's a thing between resume
virtues and eulogy virtues yeah that was
uh David Brook David Brooks said that
thank you resumé virtues are you know
how much money you make uh your degrees
everything eulogy virtues is he was a
great father he was a great friend he
helped his community he was funny and I
think most people really aspire to have
eulogy virtues but they spend all their
day chasing resume virtues resume
virtues can be great I want a good
education I want a good income but what
you're really trying to chase is to use
those things to gain more resume virtues
at the end of the day so I think if you
think about it through that lens a lot
of these things become clear and that's
why like I said going on a great
vacation with my kids if that's a 10
what's really fun about that is is
spending time with them when I'm
detached from work I'm not checking my
phone every seven seconds I'm just
spending hours with my kids giving them
my full attention that's what made me
happy The View was great on the beach
cool but that's what made me happy and I
can do that at home can I and so that's
that's the difference between like going
to Maui is a resume virtue spending time
with your kids is a eulogy
virtue why is it do you think that even
though we've proud all heard by now that
you know compounding interest is great
right you put in let's say a small or a
moderate amount of money into even just
a savings account that's acur couple
percent you know varies year by year and
with the economy of course or into the
markets that over time if you quote
unquote set it and forget it just kind
of like put it there and walk away that
you're likely to make x% over time and
you can look at the plot you can you can
look at that line upward and to the
right it almost always is Jagged line
drifting upward to the right and even
just scroll over and see okay at age
whatever I'm gonna have X number of
dollars and that value is often very
high relative to where one's current
wealth is even if they're a student or
they have very little put away we we all
hear this we can see it you can run the
models it's almost trivial and yet
people don't do that even if they have
the income to save is it that hard for
us to project our emotional state and
the sorts of things that we integrate in
terms of life meaning and value into the
future that most people just don't do
that and why do you think that is I mean
I'm not asking you to play
neurobiologist here I mean I think we
both agree that that uh time perception
is is a complicated thing um but you
would think that people would just sort
of get it but we're not rational most
people aren't rational in that way they
don't save they don't invest and they
don't compound interest and so they end
up with a lot less money than they could
have and a lot more regret yeah I think
there's two ways to think about this one
is uh my Michael batnick phrased it this
way he said if I ask you what is 8 plus
8 plus 8 plus 8 you figure that out in 5
seconds that's an easy one if I said
what is 8 time 8 time 8 time 8 time 8
even if you're a math nerd that's it's
it's too hard you can't figure it out
we're not wired for exponential thinking
we just can't do it and therefore a lot
of even if you show you the numbers Hey
invest a small amount retire with a
million dollars I think it's so
counterintuitive that most people see
that like H okay that doesn't doesn't
really seem right doesn't really pass
the sniff test how big the numbers can
get how quick quickly the numbers can
get big the other thing is if you tell a
young person hey you have 50 years in
front of you to invest that's great
times on your side when you're when
you're 70 years old you're going to have
$10 million 50 years from now might as
well be 10,000 years from now you're
talking about people who are who don't
know what they're going to eat for
dinner tonight and you're talking about
like hey let's let's talk about the year
2077 like it's so far out of there even
if that's the right way to think about
it it's it's a tough way to think about
it and time perception you mentioned is
so difficult for people if I said you're
G to get punched in the face in 10
seconds like that's a fear and you're
like oh I don't but if I said someone's
gonna punch you in the face 50 years
from now you're like I'll deal with it
when I get there it's so easy to put out
of sight out of mind and so and the
other thing is Warren Buffett talked
about this a lot he said uh actually it
was Charlie Monger who said this he said
when teaching Finance to young people
people either understand it instantly or
never it's like some people are just
wired to get it and some people aren't
and that's always been the case M often
said all the time he said the iron rule
of math is only 1% of people can end in
the top 1% and that's why for a lot of
people yes you should save and invest
for 50 years let's not pretend that that
is easy or that everybody is
psychologically able to do it some
people are wired differently of course
that's the case as they are with health
and intelligence and lots of other
things so I do think there's a thing for
financial education of getting people to
understand what is possible but I don't
think we'll ever live in a world where
everyone gets it and does it I I don't
think that world has never existed and I
think will never exist because it's not
math it's not a spreadsheet it's
behavior and and we now live in a world
where we understand the dangers of
smoking and highly processed foods and
whatever it might be but even if we know
it people still do it because it's
behavioral it's not intelligence so
showing people the numbers and getting
them to do it is night and
day do you know how they got people to
stop smoking in particular young people
it wasn't by scaring them about their
health turns out the most effective
campaign to get especially young people
to stop smoking was to hijack the
inherent rebellion of Youth and to
display ads of wealthy older people in
rooms full of smoke so became us as the
youth rebelling against them the older
generation that are trying to take our
money it had nothing to do with health I
love that and it absolutely worked yeah
and uh I have friends that work on this
sort of thing in the context of Public
Health as it relates to all sorts of
Public Health initiatives and the
effective way to change human behavior
as it relates to health is to incen
Aesthetics
to incentivize fear uh or to hijack fear
of dying but even fear of dying is not
sufficient uh as compared to um
hijacking these uh cross generational uh
let's just call them frictions um that
exist so I found that to be interesting
used a math example of 8 plus 8 plus 8
plus 8 versus 8 * 8 * 8 * 8 and you said
that the human brain is not capable of
exponential thinking or most people's
brains are not capable of exponential
thinking I think um you either
intentionally or inadvertently hit on
something really important I don't know
that the dopamine reward system which is
the fundamental currency of pursuit and
reward across all time scales it's kind
of wild right one neuromodulator and
there are other things involved that
modulate that modulator but one
neuromodulator is involved in reward
Pursuit across all time scales whether
we're playing a let's say we're both
competitive enough to play a game of
chess or Checkers dopamine is motivating
the pursuit for the win or a four-year
degree or an eight-year degree or why
you would want maybe your kids to win a
soccer game like now you're like a third
personing dopamine right it's across all
time scales all scenarios it's
incredible and across many species so it
makes me wonder and I'll have to ask
some of my colleagues that uh work on
these dopamine reward schedules uh for a
living
whether or not the dopamine reward
system actually can do exponential math
it might not be able to do exponential
math it might be that the pursuit of
water the pursuit of mates the pursuit
of food the pursuit of shelter which is
what these dopamine circuits evolved
under the constraints
of whether or not they even capable of
doing exponential thinking or if it's
like the marshmallow test which got
misconstrued in many ways but it's like
yeah would would you rather have one
right now or two in the future it's I
think for a lot of people it's it's just
like there there are some people for
whom like they're wired so differently
for this so you hear stories about like
the old the the old very wealthy people
the old billionaires of when they were
20 years old they would not get a
haircut because they knew that $3
haircut would compound into $100 by the
time they're older they were just so
Wired from birth to understand this and
to have a very long perception of time
to do it by definition that's the Rarity
most people are not like that and I I
don't know if they should be either I
don't know if you should be the kind of
person in your entire life who is always
saving for a future and and never en
what you have too like that could lead
to a lot of regret as well and there are
those people so let's parse the
marshmallow test the marshmallow test I
think initially done at Stanford um I
think it was at Bing nursery school or
something like that or maybe somewhere
at Stanford if I'm wrong someone will
correct me in the comments of course for
those that don't know is you they
brought these really cute kids into
rooms and they put the marshmallow in
front of them and they told them they
could eat it now or they could wait and
they could get two marshmallows later
and then they videotaped them and the
the videos are absolutely delightful of
the kids you know distracting themselves
or having the marshmallows talk or
taking a little piece of the
marshmallows I mean it reveals as much
variation on human self-constraint
behavior as you could possibly imagine
and they're really interesting as you
know I would like to know whether the
children that were able to wait and
therefore get two
marshmallows were trying to resist the
temptation or whether or not they were
being pulled forward by the anticipation
of two marshmallows my understanding and
maybe this is this is not complete but
my understanding at least part of it was
neither of those two things the kids who
did the best and resisted it were the
ones who distracted themselves they
weren't even thinking about the
marshmallow they would sing a song they
would start playing with their shoes
they'd play with another kid and the
ones who could not resist are the ones
who just sat there staring at the one
marshmallow that was tempting them
that's too hard to resist almost
everybody will resist that it was like
the environment that they put themselves
in but they weren't thinking into the
future about how great it would be to
have two marshmallows I don't think so I
think they were they were so because
their kids are so distracted they have
the memory of a goldfish they they they
wanted they wanted to just do something
they'd sing a song they'd play with
their shoes they play with their friends
and then by Dent of doing that all of a
sudden they had waited long enough to
get the two marshmallows I think that
was at least part of it and I think
there's true for a lot of people too
take about think about the stock market
where uh so much temptation to always
watch it and see what it's doing because
we have CNBC and there's the ticker and
the lights are green and red and whatnot
for a lot of people it's impossible to
watch that or even worse in Robin Hood
you get a push notification on your
phone that's too hard to resist but you
know what you see very good investing
Behavior where people do a really good
job is when you invest automatically
every paycheck into your 401k and you
forgot your password because that
environment is is against Temptation
there's there's nothing to do you forgot
your password but if you're just
bombarding yourself with stimulus of
what to do most people cannot resist
that my way of dealing with social media
I would say compulsion not addiction is
I now um one could take an old phone um
I actually got a phone specifically for
social media so I have Instagram and X
on that phone I don't even recall the
number of that phone I airdrop things
onto it if I want to post and I I do
what uh Rogan calls post and ghost yeah
so you post and then it goes into a box
because otherwise I'm just absolutely
Blown Away by how much time can be
sucked away all of it um you tell
yourself I'm going to just look at
social media for a moment and then
you're pulled down some rabbit hole it's
just incredible the way they've designed
these algorithms to to get you right and
of course I like social I teach on
social media this conversation will
probably be you know fragments of it
will be on social media but um I think
that people don't realize how compulsion
inducing the dopamine circuitry is yeah
and once you start getting pulled down
it you're you're a different organism
altogether and uh you know it's not a
coincidence that the people who have the
largest social media accounts spend very
little time on social media this if you
spend too much you just it just get
overwhelming well you're spending time
doing things like commenting and liking
and and there's a liability to some of
that but there's a reward to it too an
immediate reward what you're not doing
is going and doing the thing that you
bring to social media that brings you
more followers and and Views yeah so I
always think of social media as uh the
last point in a funnel where I go do
things in real life like research papers
talk to people um learn and then
organize that learning into a format
that I think people can benefit from and
then put it on social media but that's
the the end point yeah and so if I stay
too long there um then I'm not getting
more material it's almost like if if I
were a farmer um you know this is like
you know once the crops ship you know
I'm not going to stand there just like
looking at the road as the as the truck
goes by yeah you got to get back and
plant more seeds and plow the field I
mean I mean so I like to think about
these things in these very basic terms
because I feel that the dopamine
circuitry has it hasn't evolved right
right but we have new new technology
that have hijacked it to some extent
Jerry Seinfeld said one of the reason he
quit his show in the 1990s was because
what made it so good and so funny is
that he and Larry David would go like
sit in a deli and watch people order and
make a joke that's where they got their
content from was observing the world but
they got so busy and so famous that they
couldn't do that anymore and he knew
that it was going to come at the
detriment of the show that it wasn't
like the ultimate reward of like how big
was the season how many people watch the
show how much money do we make what made
them great was going out and living and
doing their thing and once it came at
the expense of that it it didn't work
anymore well this raises a really key
point for people uh including myself
which is in an ideal world one can make
a living that is sufficient for their
needs doing something that you truly
enjoy doing or I would say to be
realistic
where 75% of the activities are
pleasurable yeah
maybe 15% are kind of of neutral and
then the remainder there's some
punishing features there are punishing
features in every profession yes Jeff
said if you can enjoy half that's pretty
good okay all right so I'm I'm a little
more um stringent with my with my yeah
more of an optimist than Bezos hey I
don't but then again he's Bezos um yeah
where I mean you want to be able to
enjoy your work not all aspects of it
are are going to be pleasurable but
ideally that's the case because what
we're talking about here is effort that
precedes dopamine yeah and I'm a big
believer that dopamine that is not
preceded by effort is very dangerous
it's not just things that are addictive
but by way of example methamphetamine
cocaine
dramatically and quickly Spike dopamine
levels with no effort put in with no
effort put in and then of course we know
from the beautiful work of my colleague
anmy and others that then the the
dopamine profile is that then the higher
the peak and the faster the rise to Peak
then the more drop below Baseline and
the more time it takes to return to
Baseline and typically what people do is
when they're below Baseline in terms of
their dopamine that's when they start
hitting the Hammer with whatever
Behavior or substance and all it does is
drive that Baseline further and further
and further down maybe that's a good
analogy for the lottery winner who gets
a lot of money a lot of dopamine in this
example but didn't put anything into it
you didn't build a business you didn't
work at your career you just got lucky
so it doesn't feel as good there's no
effort put into to like base it against
compare it against what you were talking
about before which is time that's
unstructured with your kids playing
Legos it's almost it sounds effortless
it's not like you're like oh I got to go
play with my is Legos I'm sure that
you're like yes like this is fun this is
this is the good stuff as they say and
so there are forms of reward it seems
that are not preceded by effort although
you had to raise those kids and your
wife had to give birth to those kids and
it's work but but in terms of what's
happening in in that limited time frame
it's just so seamless right it's just
sheer pleasure and yet that kind of
pleasure is enriching is this has me
very perplexed as a biologist I I I
still don't know the underlying
mechanisms but clearly we have multiple
paths to pleasure but I think we have
only one path for motivation and that's
dopamine but I think there are multiple
forms of pleasure and I'm certain that
dopamine that is high levels of dopamine
that are not preceded by effort are not
just bad they are downright dangerous I
feel like so much of it too with
parenting m is a slightly different
topic but it's the things that you're
not trying to have fun with that build
the biggest memories and for me it's
when I travel with my son he's nine so
we go on a lot of trips now what's fun
is not the event we're going to whether
it's skiing or a football game that's
not the best part of the trip the best
part of the trip is flying with him
renting a car with him going out to
dinner with him that's where you get all
the memories it's like it's a process of
doing it that's going to you're really
enjoying that's going to build all the
memories not NE not necessarily the the
final destination where you're going
yeah I I just want to hover on that for
a second because I can think of numerous
examples in my life where the best parts
of a relationship were like a drive home
with someone where like you know I'm
asleep for part of the time they're
asleep for part of the time and you get
back and like like you really you feel
like you really did something there's
something bonding about about traveling
with people yeah even in the absence of
external input like you're you're just
uh what is that it must be something
fundamental some fundamental circuit
about about journeying with with other
members of our species going through a
challenge with someone going going
through a journey of like we we did this
together we went through it together I
think there's so much of that if you go
on go on a long hike with somebody at
the top like you want to hug each other
like we just did that together and it's
not it's not even about being at the top
it's like the journey you did with each
other so cliche but I think it's true
for a lot of things and what's that
movie with Emil Hirsch where he um it's
a true story uh about the guy that goes
out into the Alaskan Wilderness and
lives on that bus and um sadly he passes
away there I just spoiled it for you um
but he has I think it's called into the
wild into the wild where he's um
obsessed with this notion of bonding
with nature but then in his journal a
real Journal of a guy that really died
out there um he gets to the realization
that the the the fundamental uh pursuit
in life is to experience things with
other people other people absolutely
yeah and this is why solitary
confinement is such a a torture the
extreme end of it brutal right
brutal on the other end of the spectrum
there's Freedom so let's talk about
Freedom yeah it means different things
to different people but certainly one
does not want to be enslaved by anything
including their own pursuit of work so
they I think at least two forms of
anti-freedom one would be the type that
exists within our head we have to
continue on this track because I'm
afraid of failure or I'm in pursuit of
something and we are actually enslaved
in a way that we uh s create for
ourselves in in the act of pursuit the
other is the job where you know it's
providing resources but we really don't
need to be there and yet people don't
hop off the train yeah you know they
could they could escape the the dreaded
boss or the dreaded circumstance you
know I remember a time when all I wanted
was a window at work that opened for
fresh air that's all I wanted I like all
these other things I just I just wanted
a window that opened I even tried to
find one of these like little saws to
but then the maintenance people or or
the the whatever the facilities people
told me I'd get in trouble
um we we yearn for Freedom we hate we
hate enslavement right for all the
obvious reasons in your observation what
is the best way to frame this need for
freedom and I I have to imagine that
people listening are at various points
along their their careers um what have
you observed here in yourself and with
other people you talk to wealthy not
wealthy what is freedom how do how do we
get real freedom I think there's there's
this anecdote that I love which was from
uh Franklin Roosevelt when he was a kid
I think he was like five years old he
complained to his mother one day he said
my entire life is rules and schedules
and I hate it so mom said okay Frankie
tomorrow you can do whatever you want do
the day is yours anything you want and
his mom Sarah Roosevelt wrote in her
diary that night he said that day that
he could do anything he went back to his
normal schedule he did everything on
schedule like he was supposed to do but
he was much happier because nobody was
telling him to do it and I think that's
what's true for a lot of people Freedom
does not mean you do nothing it doesn't
necessarily mean you retire it doesn't
mean you quit working I want to be free
and independent which means I want to
wake up every morning and say I can do
whatever the hell I want today even of
most mornings what I want to do is work
and be productive and put myself to use
so I think a lot of people misconstrue
Freedom as I'm going to I'm going to
ride off into the sunset and do nothing
now it's like no I think people have an
inherent drive to want to be productive
and social and do things but there's a
big difference between your boss telling
you to do it and doing it on your own
terms when I was a a junior in college
like a lot of young men I wanted to be
an investment banker that's what it
looked like power and Prestige so I got
this Investment Banking internship and
it was absolutely miserable
uh they had this saying that I is so
funny in hindsight they said if you
don't come to work on Saturday don't
bother coming back on Sunday like just
the culture of it was work as work 100
hours a week just just go nuts with it
and I hated I hated every single second
and I had to leave but it wasn't because
I was not into hard work I think I was
absolutely willing to to work hard I
just didn't want anyone to tell me to do
it and so when I became um you know not
necessarily financially independent but
I could have a job it was it was more
entrepreneurial it was like oh I will
work very hard and sometimes I might
work as hard as an investment banker I
might work 80 hours a week but it's on
my terms and I think everyone is way
more willing to do that than they are to
be told what to do I think that is an
inherent human driver and if you can use
your money for Independence to where you
can wake up and say I have the financial
flexibility to work where I want live
where I want retire when I want take a
different job move to a different
department even if it's going to pay
less that giving yourself Independence
and autonomy I think for most people is
what's going to drive that's that's
that's the highest tool that you can use
with money and what's important about
that is where do you get independence
with money it's the things you don't
spend money on it's the car you didn't
buy it's the house you didn't buy and
most people will view that as like idle
money you're saving up money it's just
sitting in the bank doing nothing no no
no it's giving you Independence and once
you view is like every dollar that you
don't spend is money that you are
actually spending on Independence it's
not Idol it's giving you a it's giving
you marginal more Independence than you
had the day before then I think that's
that to me that's why I save money I'm
not saving money because I'm a I'm a
pessimist I think it's all going to come
collapsing down I'm saving money because
I want to be independent because that's
what I think is going to give me the
most fulfillment the most happiness and
that's where the savings comes
from wow I think this is a super
important
concept how should the person who is
let's just say early midcareer who likes
what they're doing but thinks that this
is probably not the thing for them I
hear about this all the time like it's
this like yeah like it's it's good but
it's a ton of work it's unclear how it's
going to turn out but they feel like
they're already on the conveyor belt
yeah there's always this question of do
you do you stay in Investment Banking
another year to make a bunch of money
and then you get out so that you then
have the freedom to pursue something
where you have more freedom um you know
people are always playing this kind of
mental math and I don't think there's a
a clear answer unless of course you're
lucky enough that like you fall in love
with science I mean I did not become a
neuroscientist to make money and Lord
knows I didn't I mean I made some I made
a living but I if people what I was
making as a tenured 45-year-old
professor at a one of the Premier
universities in the world where the
salaries are relatively high they would
be shocked right just shocked at post
tax income is quite Low by Bay Area
standards right but did you feel like
you had Independence you could teach
what you want say what you want there
was a level of Independence absolutely
oh and I loved it and and um you know
and I still teach there and you know
it's one of these things where I
wouldn't trade it for anything I also in
terms of intellectual stimulation um in
terms of being able to look to my left
or look to my right and and realize that
most of the people at Stanford students
included are just phenomenal like their
level of intellect their Drive their
excitement for what they're doing me no
one ends up there by accident right so
that was and remains extremely exciting
yeah um but I think a lot of people
unless they they they find a profession
that they really
love or there's some feature of that
profession that that keeps them you know
looped in in a way that that feels
satisfying yeah the people Etc most
people are kind of thinking like all
right how do I work to make a living and
then you know like what what's the exit
ramp people think a lot about exit ramps
and sometimes it's a dollar amount but
also it's the idea that maybe you know
go work on their real love which might
be like gardening they want to you hear
about these these sort of hobby
interests right I'll go I'll write
poetry or I'll you know go you know
Ceramics or something like that um the
things that they truly enjoy doing H how
how should people optimize along those
musts versus want to versus sort of
aspirational goals two things come to
mind here one is like if if most people
understand inherently the dangers of
Communism or something if the
government's telling you what to do when
to do it what to say that's a bad thing
that's going to erode Society but a lot
of those people work at a at a job where
their boss tells them what time to come
in what to wear what to say how to act
what not it's so they they they really
understand it fundamentally at one level
but they're actually doing some version
now companies have to manage their
employees what not it's it's not a a a a
knock against that but I think what's
really true for Independence and people
when they if they eventually move on to
writing poetry and playing in their
Garden whatever it might be is that you
eventually is that you leave on your own
terms that whatever your exit from your
career was was because you wanted to do
it on your own terms so the thing in
Psychology called the peak end rule
where uh to simplify it minimalize it a
lot of how you remember any Endeavor
that you did in life a career a vacation
whatever it is is how you felt to the
very end and for a lot of people if you
have a great career you enjoyed your
career you helped people you made money
your colleagues appreciated you but then
you got fired or your boss came to you
and said you're too old to keep doing
this that's bad that's a that's you'll
never recover from that and you compare
that to the people who quit on their own
terms they said look I'm proud of my
career but that's enough I'm going to
I'm going to take a step back and pass a
baton to another generation those are
the people who even if they didn't
really enjoy their career that much will
look back at it fondly because it gets
back to freedom and autonomy and control
do you leave on your own terms or are
you forced out on somebody else's
schedule and so I think Maxim wherever
you go in life whatever you're doing
even if you're not an entrepreneur
maximizing for Independence and autonomy
and doing it on your own terms on your
own calendar is absolutely vital in
anything you're doing I mean Mo most
people are not necessarily particularly
as they get older are not necessarily
scared of death they're scared of a
death not on their own
terms that that's going to sneak up on
them where they're not going to have a
chance to say goodbye so I think that's
a good analogy for a lot of these things
we're we're we're we're not scared of
the ultimate outcome we're scared of not
being able to do it on our own terms
I once heard Ray doio say something
along the lines of you know the first
third of your life has spent trying to
um learn how to function in the world
then there's a kind of middle third
where you are acquiring resources to be
able to take care of yourself and people
close to you and then in the final third
of your life you want to take your
knowledge take what you've gleaned in
terms of Financial and other types of
wealth because of course there are other
types of wealth and put back you know
for subsequent Generations it a
beautiful model if you think about it I
heard it phrased as when you get older
you either become an elder or elderly
you get to choose which one do you want
to be an elder and help other people or
elderly you're just going to
disintegrate over time you got to choose
which one uh nowadays we have both the
benefit and the problem of people living
longer and maintaining Vigor longer and
therefore working longer this is
certainly true in Academia people don't
like to retire yeah they really do not
like to retire and I don't think it's
just so they can make more money I think
it's so they can stay
intellectually active people get into
science typically because they like
learning uh or academics generally they
have a campus office where they go to
and you know it makes them feel socially
connected so you can understand all the
reasons why these people in their late
60s 70s and even 80s sometimes even 90s
continue to continue to go to work it's
rare for these older generations of
people that stay in various professions
to continue to um glean resources but it
happens I mean I how old is Buffett um
993 maybe yeah he's still investing yeah
oh yeah full time okay and I'm
presumably he's going to use that money
for what either philanthropy or
generational wealth within his family is
that the plan he's already given away I
think about 100 billion okay and the
plan is to give away the vast majority I
think he announced recently that he was
going to leave each of his kids a
billion dollars for philanthropy not for
their personal use but for philanthropy
and the rest is all is all given away oh
yeah the the children of the ultra Rich
that inherit all their wealth uh I don't
know what the numbers are are there I I
know a great number of them squander it
yes but I also know a few examples of
some that really make good on that those
in those uh incredible assets that they
inherited and are you know very um
thoughtful hardworking people it does
happen there couple families I think of
all the big Rober Baron families of 150
years ago the Rockefellers probably did
it the best the Rockefellers still have
a lot of wealth the Vanderbilts by far
did it the worst they just squandered it
in a couple generations and this is
fairly well known now but it's pretty
interesting
the first Vanderbilt Heir who did not
get a trust fund for whom all the money
was was dried up the first person who
didn't get any money was Anderson Cooper
of CNN his mother Gloria Vanderbilt was
the last Vanderbilt who got a big trust
fund and Cooper I think not
coincidentally is the most successful
and probably the happiest Vanderbilt
Heir in 150 years and he's talked about
this he was like I was the first person
in my family who had to make a name for
himself the fact that his last name is
not Vanderbilt it's Cooper and didn't
get any money he was like I I had to go
out and find my own way and find my own
identity whereas all of his ancestors
their identity was you're rich from
birth that's your identity you don't
need to go out and make a name for
yourself you don't need to work hard you
don't need to create anything all you
need to do is sit here and spend your
money and it made them miserable and
Cooper was the first person look this is
this is very anecdotal not saying this
how it's going to work for everyone but
the first person who had to make a name
for himself and work for himself was the
one who was the most successful and
probably the happiest
super important concept again uh in
incredibly important I think because
people often will think that they
because they were born into families
that didn't have a lot of money that
somehow um they were given the short end
of the stick and in some sense they were
right I mean it's one thing to grow up
in a in a world with assets and another
world where you don't have assets um but
we don't often hear about the the
downside it's hard to have sympathy for
a Vanderbilt Heir who inherited $400
million on their 18th birthday
sympathy for that right right well the
show succession right you know it's all
about the the horrible uh interpersonal
dynamics of people that have a lot of
wealth because it's never enough and
they they self-destruct essentially I
think the situation is you don't have
sympathy for them but you should also
realize that if you were in their shoes
you would probably self-destruct as well
it's very difficult to do once in a
while you see someone who is completely
motivated irrespective of money you know
Mark Zuckerberg was offered a billion
dollars cash for Facebook when I think
he was 22 and he said no I don't want it
I'm going to keep going that's a
ridiculously rare personality and I
think you know most people if I
inherited a billion dollars on my 18th
birthday I probably would have no
motivation but if musk did if Elon Musk
did wouldn't slow them down whatsoever
uh Jeff Bezos did Mark Zuckerberg did
those are very rare people who have
motivation that is so detached from
money I wonder if it's the excesses of
wealth that um destroy people or if it's
the fact that the excesses take them
away from the pursuit of what delivered
the wealth in the first place for a lot
of those people it's the pursuit of
solving the problem that's that's doing
it and I've I have a good friend Patrick
oasi who phrased it this way I'm going
to paraphrase him but he said if you had
to describe the me the mindset of those
very successful entrepreneurs it's not
driven it's not motivated it's tortured
that they wake up every morning tortured
by the problems that they're not fixing
and the the opportunities that they have
not yet uh uh found and there's a famous
Elon Musk interview I think it was on
Lex Friedman where he was like you think
you want to be me the richest man in the
world but you don't and he was like it's
a storm up here it's a mess up here I
think that's true for a lot of people my
friend David SRA is a great podcast
founder love such a good guy one of the
best guys in the world I've ever met but
he say of of all the 350 Founders that
he's profiled uh only one of them has he
actually said I I would want that guy's
life it was Ed Thorp but put that aside
of the other 349 I think you read their
biography and can say I'm so glad that
they existed by most most of the time
they did a lot of good in the world they
created products that make us better off
and never in a million years what I want
his life it seems miserable because most
of the time the the simple answer is
their financial and Career Success came
the reason they're so successful is
because they devoted every waking second
of their entire life to this one problem
this one Endeavor and that came at the
expense of their family life of their
health of their mental health their
physical health and if you get a full
view of their it's easy to look at musk
and say oh richest man in the world that
would wouldn't that be fun yeah but it
came because he's had this life a
singular Devotion to well in his case
two or three different companies um and
I think if you take that full picture
it's less glamorous than it would than
it would seem and it's too tempting in
life to have Envy of someone and say oh
well I want their money and I want their
career and their relationship or their
humor like you're picking little bits
and pieces from their life but it's not
how it works you got to take the full
package and when you look at the full
package of those people who you might
envy if you actually take like a
complete view of their life maybe some
of them you would say no that is a great
life like Ed Thorp but I I think for a
lot of them if you got the full view you
would look at it and say oh that's
actually a lot different than I thought
I frame this one way if you look at this
is FL flagrantly anecdotal but among the
10 richest men in the world there are a
cumulative 15 divorces among them so
it's very easy particularly for young
people to say oh that's like I'm jealous
of that person I envy that person I want
to be that person but I think for a lot
of them if you actually got a full view
of their life it's not nearly as good as
you would
think I
think people like Elon Musk people like
Mark Zuckerberg um they represent these
you know incredibly extreme examples
that obviously um most people can't even
including me can't fathom what a day in
their life must be like you know I met
Zuck he was on this this podcast and um
it seems that he really enjoys doing
what he's doing um but I think for me
and for most people it's just like so
far out of the stratosphere of of of
understanding similar to the the amount
of wealth that they've acquired it just
sort of like what do you even do with
all of that and people go well I'd
figure it out yeah I'm sure you would
but you know it's it's just it's so
astronomically outside the scale of
one's normal kind of dopamine reward
schedules that you it's hard to imagine
and what are you going to do buy a buy a
plane as big as a state you know you
know so um but there's a place in
between struggling to quote unquote make
it and being at that EX at that extreme
where people hit that sweet spot and I
think a lot of your work is really aimed
at at least Shining Light on the
possibility of a sweet spot yeah where
you're doing something that you find
meaningful U making sufficient income
that your anxiety is buffered um you
have meaningful relationships in and out
of work and you've essentially built
quotequote good
right I mean I think uh I heard nval say
something recently where he said you
know you want resources in along the
dimensions I just mentioned a healthy
Fit
Body a calm mind and a home full of love
yeah I think it's pretty awesome list
right there and it's a lot of work
though right and with just to you know
check off even one of those four boxes a
lot of work right I think because money
is so tangible of counting it is so easy
and so tangible that even if people know
that they're going to put an inordinate
amount of effort towards making more
money at the expense of their
relationships their health their
children their friends their family it
comes at the expense because if I were
to say you know how do I increase my
income by 10% it's like I can wrap my
head around that I can give you a number
of what that would be and how I might be
able to do it but if I said how do I get
my kids to love me 10% more like ah I
don't I have no idea how to measure that
or how to even pursue it so even if I
want that because it's hard it's not
tangible it's much easier to ignore and
just pursue the thing that you can count
which is money do you have a dog I do
golden retriever I was going to say you
want them to love you 10% more get them
a puppy but but it sounds like you
already did that I'm just I'm only half
kidding um I would say that you know
dogs are not only unconditional love but
uh they have the ability to to give on a
on a you know daily basis multiple times
per day in a way I mean they give love
as as readily as they receive love it's
just it's just like this perfect
reciprocal Loop right and they're
constantly in the moment they're just
living right there this is great cartoon
a lot of people have probably seen it
it's uh a a guy and a dog sitting on a
lake and the guy's thought bubble coming
out of his head is he's thinking about
money he's thinking about work he
think's thinking about stocks the dog's
thought bubble is a picture of them
sitting on the lake they're just he's
the dog's just right in the moment just
enjoying what he's doing right there I
think that's like that's my jealousy of
when of of my dog when I look at her 24
hours a day everyone will as a dog will
recognize this they're just in the
moment they just enjoy what they're
doing whatever they're doing and
everyone including me is either uh
worrying thinking about the past or
dreaming about the future I love that
what's your dog's name if I may Lucy
golden retrievers are an amazing breed
because they also are universally loving
yeah that they they love the person that
you know they their owner the most uh
but they also love people that stop and
meet them on the street not all dogs are
like that the worst guard dogs in the
world you can break into your house a
golden retriever will just come up and
wag its tail and like yeah I love it um
let's talk about this social comparison
thing um
I'm trying to make this practical for
people that are both partnered and not
partnered seems to me that a lot
of what I've observed in terms of people
who are on the on the conveyor belt work
work work work work have a picture in
their mind of kind of where that's all
going when enough is enough and when
they plan to hop off or stay on or how
late to stay in large part based on yeah
their upbringing yeah kind of who they
are are but also the messages that
they're getting from
typically the one other person that has
the greatest degree of input right like
you could create a picture where the
spouse in either direction is saying
like we need more right right that
changes the picture completely right um
where the spouse just says like I would
just like to see you more I don't need
any more stuff yeah I just want to see
you more we want to see you more these
are the sorts of atome dynamics that I
think drive a lot of decisions about
career not just what careers to pursue
but how long to stay in whether or not
you try and make partner in a firm
whether or not your social media account
needs X number more followers or not I
think to me this is as important as the
social comparison of of your peers at
work or online the messages that we
receive by the people closest to us
about what to be afraid of what the
needs are and I don't know that people
have really parsed how to you know how
to resolve all that um but I'm guessing
you probably have some thoughts about
this well I think it's it's the balance
between it is so difficult because for a
lot of people who have families and are
working very hard at the core if you
said why are you working so hard well to
make more money why why do you want more
money to take care of my family like
it's for very good intentions but it's
coming at the expense of time with your
family and whatnot so a lot of things
it's not that you're making a terrible
decision you're you're doing what you
think is right and then if you said well
how much is enough to take care of your
family by and large it's a game of
comparison the way that people live 100
years ago that what is a good life 100
years ago is an completely inadequate
life today not even 100 years ago you
back to go back to our parents
generation and say in the 1950s there is
a Nostalgia for the 1950s of oh life was
so good then and so great and the white
picket fence and the dog and the stay-at
home mom like it was it was a good
picture but what was the definition of a
good life back then uh a good middle
class life was an 800t house with one
bathroom for four people and camping for
your annual vacation you would describe
life that most people would say that's
inadequate today that's not my
definition of a good life today so that
is Shifting all the time and therefore
you're out you're you're saying like
well how much money do you need to be
happy the truth is I need more money
than than the next family than the next
person it's this continuous chain and I
think a lot of that is just Evolution
it's a competition for resources and it
doesn't matter how much money you have
what matters is that you have more money
than the next person that's the that's
the sad Truth for a lot of this and
therefore you can easily imagine a world
in which my grand kids are earning on
average way more money than we are today
and have way better resources Better
Health better Technologies and they're
no happier for it and they don't feel
any more relieved for it they don't feel
like they can scale back and work less
for it because they're going to be
competing with other people that have
all those things John maer kan's a great
Economist very famously predicted a
world where people would be working 20
hours a week because technology was
going to make it so we didn't need to
work and that's not how it works
whatsoever we are working less than we
did back when everybody was a farmer but
not nearly as as as as little as we
could be if we still had the
expectations of a 1950s family living in
an 800t house if we had those
expectations people could be working way
less but it's all a competition between
other people so even if 100 years from
now a middle class families living in a
5,000 foot house with a spaceship in
their backyard if that becomes the norm
you don't take you don't appreciate it
any of it I mean if you took someone 100
years ago if you took John Rockefeller
the richest man in the world 100 years
ago and brought brought him to today and
showed him a middle class family in
America he would say what is this thing
Advil you take a pill that makes your
headache go away what he you have
sunscreen you just rub this on the face
you don't get sunburnt he would his jaw
would be on the floor but nobody
appreciates that today like he would
because it's just common place you your
your definition of a good life is I
expect to have that so it's always going
to be the case that the reason we're
working hard is to take care of our
family and what we feel like is an
adequate amount is a growing level over
time I should also say that that is by
and large a great thing the reason
Society progresses is because most
people wake up in the morning feeling a
little bit inadequate whatever I have
today is not enough and I need to go
work harder to get more that's why we
have good technology and economic growth
over time so at the macro level it's a
great thing that's what pushes Society
forward and better medical Technologies
all better Technologies but the
individual level it creates this hamster
wheel of a constant feeling of
inadequacy that we try to compensate for
by working harder and working harder
even when it comes at the expense of
things that should be more dear to us
like our friends and family and health
and with social media we now have access
to Millions if not billions of
comparison points whereas just 30 years
ago even 20 years ago we only had access
to local comparison points like the
people in your neighborhood drove
certain types of cars now online you can
see people that you went to high school
with that have certain lives and their
vacations that are spectacular relative
to the ones that you know one typically
has I'd like to to talk about this
notion of social comparison as as a
function of place um we can touch on
some major cities we were doing this
before we started recording it's kind of
fun to do like in the Bay Area in
Silicon Valley area where I grew up um
it seems like there's a a High um
there's a high value placed on the
people who manage to do things that Wick
out to the entire world the building of
companies or technologies that go
everywhere it's not just because of
Facebook and Instagram it's um also
because of Biotech it's because of all
sorts of things um apple right I mean
there's a whole history of that um what
would you say for like New York City
what like what is the dominant message
that's being pumped into the psyche of
New Yorkers um and by the way I love New
York City but it'd be fun to play this
game a little bit as an example and then
we'll then Wick it out to to people
regardless of where they live in the
world this is one of those things where
what is so good and beneficial for
society is what makes indiv miserable so
I think what is the message here in Los
Angeles or in New York or or any other
big city San Francisco the message is
waking up in the morning and feeling
inadequate because you are surrounded by
people who at least look like they're
doing better than you and you say I have
to I have to chase that person I have to
get what they have that is great for
society that's where we get new
technologies new Innovations and growth
at the individual level it's very
difficult I grew up out in the woods in
Lake Tahoe and in that region uh if you
are a dentist let's say you are on top
of the world you are the richest guy in
town everybody looked up to you you had
the nicest house the nicest car if you
are a family dentist here in Los Angeles
you don't stick out whatsoever you might
you might feel like you are so far
behind because you're surrounded by
legitimate billionaires and so I think
it's interesting to ask is a dentist
happier in Lake Tahoe or here I think
it's probably in Lake Tahoe because your
comparison group is so much less
especially back in the pre-social media
days the states that are statistically
the happiest in the United States it's
not it's not for cities it's not Los
Angeles it's not New York tends to be in
the midwest where wonderful places
whatnot but less competitive than the
grind of the big cities and so but
that's where you know if at the
individual where are you happiest it's
where you have less comparison but for
society what is better it's when you
have a huge competition for getting
ahead so I don't know I I don't know
where I come down on that of like where
I would want to be of course I want to
be happy as an individual but I want to
live in a in a society that is moving
ahead and the reason it's moving ahead
is because most people wake up feeling
inadequate you GRE up in Tahoe yeah um I
love Lake Tahoe but can I ask you did
you grow up being competitive or
thinking about um how well people skied
or snowboarded yes absolutely it was
also I lived in Tahoe pre pre- Tech
money it's very different now because so
much Bay Area Tech money just flooded
into it it's its own little Hampton now
but back in the day it was like I felt
like when I grew up normal people drove
old pickup trucks and rich people drove
new pickup trucks that was the
difference between rich and poor and
both in a city like Los Angeles New York
and in a social media World especially
it's normal people drive Honda Civics
and rich people have private jets like
the the stratification between them is
is just blown so far out of proportion I
see this with my nine-year-old son who
like a lot of kids watches Mr Beast who
I think is great I think he's an awesome
awesome guy but it's completely warped
my son's sense of money because Mr Beast
will be like oh keep your hand on the
table and the and the last person with
their hand wins a million dollars it's
like if if if that's your sense of money
it's complet warped and and skewed and
so look I it's it's it's a tough way to
live and I think the more of that angst
that people have of I'm inadequate I
need to get ahead the better Society is
going to be the more technology we're
going to have great example of this is
what decades were the most
technologically Innovative by far it's
not even close it was 1930s the Great
Depression and the 1940s World War II
when Society was on fire that's when
every business every scientist every
entrepreneur woke up every morning and
said I need to figure this out right now
today immediately during the Great
Depression if you were a business owner
it was if I don't figure out a way to
become more efficient I'm bankrupt
tomorrow so that was the birth of a lot
of the assembly lines it was the birth
of the grocery store the birth of the
laundromat every business got more more
uh uh just better at at at what they do
and the ones that didn't went out of
business immediately World War II was if
we don't figure out new
technologies uh we're we're we're going
to lose everything Hitler's going to
control the planet so that was nuclear
energy radar jets go on down the list of
things that we benefit from today happen
because of that social angst that we had
back then and so I think there's so much
evidence that Society progresses when
things are a little bit on fire not too
much on fire because then you just get
overwhelmed with it but if you have a
little bit of angst of I need to wake up
I I need to do this and when society's
become fat and happy and decadent or
when companies do this companies that
just are minting money and there's no
pressure on it they have more money than
they know to do with that's the downfall
of a lot of companies Sears IBM Intel
Boeing who are either not around or are
shells of their former S I think you can
tie a lot of that to the success that
they had in the past when there was no
pressure to innovate and get and get
ahead it was just a culture of we have
so much lying around here that we can do
anything that we want I I I had a guy
tell me one time who said every business
should have a little bit of debt uh
because it keeps you in check keeps your
Ambitions in line of waking up and being
like no I have to succeed this year
because we have debt to pay off
and when you have too much freedom and a
little bit too much autonomy you have a
higher chance of just letting it slip
away what made you great when you are
young and poor and broke and hungry uh
slips away when the wealthier you become
tell me what you think of this mental
exercise as you're describing this to me
I'm thinking about um how at different
stages of my career first academic
science and I still teach but I'm shut
down my animal lab still involved in
some human research but mainly focused
on the podcast the these
days um I can look to different things
around me that were the the force is
pulling on me I like to think in terms
of carrot and stick you know for those
that don't know what that is because we
have a lot of listeners from outside the
US carrot you know carrot is the thing
you're working towards the the enticing
thing the reward stick is the is the
punishment carrot and stick because
frankly that's how the brain works
carrot and stick right um and a lot of
what we're talking about today is carrot
and sticks of different different sizes
different types
etc for every stage of my career
graduate student
postto professor before tenure Professor
after getting tenure it's kind of
interesting concept people think of it
as job for life but it's really academic
freedom and you're still on the
fundraising treadmill or even as a
podcaster you know like what the force
was inside me and not trying to make
this about me I just kind of I know that
there are different people that I'm
trying to
satisfy and of course satisfy my own
curiosity and intellect but there there
are forces there's the I'm part of a
group I'm part of a team here I can't
let them down so it doesn't matter how
well I slept last night I happened to
sleep pretty well last night but doesn't
matter I got to show up right got to
suit up and show up as they
say do you think it's worthwhile for
people to stop wherever they are in
their life Arc and just think about like
where are these these forces pulling us
the carrots and the sticks because I
think there in lies a lot of information
um are you working for an expectation
that you need to fulfill because you did
it before I sometimes think about
professional athletes they sometimes
have a shorter professional life than in
other careers because just physical
capabilities give away but you know like
what drives them I often want to know
like what pulls them like where do they
feel
obligated you know not just you know
what the drive is but where do they feel
obligated where do they feel like kind
of pulled is it to the general public is
it their parents is it their Bank
account is it the fear that they're
going to have to retire at some point do
you ever think about this kind of stuff
I think a lot of it is tied to your
identity of just who do you see in the
mirror when you wake up every morning
and if your identity is I'm a
professional athlete if your identity is
I'm a podcaster I am a rich person
whatever it might be then that's that's
what's pulling you it's that source of
your identity so this gets back to the
Paul Graham idea of keep your identity
small I think he met it in meant it
mainly in the context of politics of
politics can just poison your identity
and it it it really affects your
thinking but keeping your identi small
for a lot of things I think is a great
point of view the more you look in the
mirror and say I am a blank doesn't
matter what that is I'm a professor I'm
an author whatever it is it's hard to
give that up because it's part of your
identity I saw this with my own with my
own dad who was a he was a doctor and he
retired and he went back to work a year
later because I think at least part of
it was when he looked in the mirror he
had to say I am a doctor that was his
identity and when he retired he couldn't
say that anymore and it drove him crazy
I think that's true for a lot of people
now that could be great for him it was
great and I think for me my identity I
think my core identity is I'm a father
I'm a husband I hope to be a friend but
then maybe it's I'm an author and if I
had to give that up it might might sting
a little bit it's not maybe the core of
my identity but it's right there and I
think for a lot of people if you're
successful core to their identity is I'm
a person who makes a lot of money I'm a
person who makes X dollars per year and
they're unable to give that up and
that's that again I think if we're
talking about money that's when money
becomes a liability is when it's
ingrained in your identity and it's
controlling you you're not using it as a
tool
it's using you as its little marionette
doll to control you every day and I I
think that's that's when a lot of people
go astray with their happiness with
money is when it starts controlling them
because it's so core to who they see in
the mirror every day yeah that's like
that cartoon of the person standing with
a little cage in front of their face
like they're they're giving up Freedom
by virtue of some mental construct right
I wonder if um perhaps even better than
uh Paul's idea of shrinking one's ident
to make it operational and make it verb
based because it's one thing to say I'm
going to not use my professional title
of podcast or Professor author doctor
but if one gets to the verb function
that drove the pursuit of things in the
first place I enjoy doing this I'm a
curious person like like you know I have
the I seem to mention him all the time
and I'm just going to do it because it's
my podcast um Rick rubin's a close
friend and I feel so lucky for that
friendship of course I love love the
music he's produced but that's not why I
love the friendship I happen to just
really think Rick's a great guy but
because he's so verb and action-based
it's about almost everything Rick talks
about in terms of creativity and
productivity is about discarding with
titles and concepts of who you were
before and just being in the verb state
of wherever you happen to be at that
point in your life and creating
offerings
yeah and he actually likes to remove the
concept of an audience he actually talks
about this is your offering to God and
the the audience may or may not like it
but that in his words are the way is the
way to frame it because otherwise you
end up trying to satisfy people
absolutely and then you're no longer in
the process of of of exploring your
curiosity or creativity so yeah I've
decided at this moment and I'll make it
I'll put it on record that I'm not going
to think of myself as a podcaster I mean
I did a lot of things I did you know
pursued skateboarding pursued you
tropical fish tanks pursued you know uh
science and and research scien teaching
which you know and then this public
education and podcasting I fully expect
that in 5 to 10 years I'll be doing
something completely different but it'll
still be attached to the verb state that
drove every single one of those
professions yeah or every every single
one of those Pursuits because as Rick's
taught me it's the energy that you need
to continue to tap into that is
self-rewarding the feelings of delight
of friction and then release when you
solve a problem it's not really about
the profession or the title or even the
the resources that come from that but
that in fact the greatest resources in
particular Financial Resources coming
from identifying the verb state of being
in pursuit of something that's truly
unique to you yeah and that changes over
time I'm always amazed at these examples
like the Warren buffets and these people
have been investing their whole life you
pointed this out in your book that one
of the the uh fundamental things about
Buffett being so successful is that he's
had a lot of time investing since he was
11 and he's 93 right it doesn't seem
like he needs another venue it seems
like he's got dialed that's his venue if
he were if you were a golfer he'd be
golfing at 93 yeah he's he's doing it
because he loves to do it I think I
think it's for me as a writer what's
always been the case wonder if this and
I think this might might might really
apply to your own career I've always
written for an audience of one which is
myself I just want to write things that
I think are interesting I want to write
stories that I find appealing I want to
write it in a style that I would enjoy
reading and I don't I don't care that
much about the audience who might read
it of course I I want them to read it
and maybe buy the books and enjoy it but
I'm writing for myself and I think you
always do your best work when you do
that if you're writing or producing a
podcast for an audience of one which is
you and so um I think if you're doing it
otherwise it's performative and and
people do much worse work they're much
less creative they're much less
enjoyable when it's when it's
performative when you start off by
asking what does the audience want to
hear or see do that but that's what most
people do and even what does every
writing 101 teacher teach their students
know your audience I don't I don't think
it's good it's good advice because know
your audience very quickly becomes
Pander to your audience not just as
writers but in any form of work that you
do pandering to your boss pandering to
your quarterly metrics whatever that
might be you're always going to do your
best work if you have the independence
and the autonomy to have an audience of
one which is yourself Brian chesky of
Airbnb talks about this he's like don't
build a product that a thousand people
like build a product that 100 people
love or that one person you love and use
it that's when you're going to do always
do your best work you're not trying to
manage a product or a book or a podcast
towards some Metric or goal you're doing
it cuz you love doing it much easier
said than done for a lot of careers
because if you're working for a company
you you do have metrics you have to
follow you do have formulas and policies
you have to follow so it's not that
everyone can do this but it's it's
unavoidable that you're always going to
do your best work when it's yours and
you're doing it for yourself not because
you're trying to reach some Metric I
guess the phrase you know be a lifer I
used to think that meant if you were a
musician stay a musician if you're in
finance stay in finance but I think now
I'm going to revise that to one wants to
be a life for at tapping into the energy
of pursuing things that are really
meaningful to them in that moment yeah
in that phase of life because it's so
different I mean when I was a kid I was
obsessed with fish tanks and tropical
birds and then skateboarding punk rock
music and it changed I mean the venue
changed but we don't really change as in
in terms of identity very much right
these professions and the these bank
accounts and we don't
actually we're not fundamentally Changed
by them it's it's really a bunch of verb
States that that drive all this and I
actually hope that in 20 years I'm doing
something different that I'm not writing
about the same topic so maybe I maybe I
hope I'm still writing and thinking and
reading and learning but if you're
always doing the same thing I think
someone like Buffett is an incredibly uh
Oddball Rare Bird who's been doing the
same thing for 80 years and loves it
like I I want to grow and adapt and
evolve in in what I'm doing but if
something becomes core to your identity
then it's hard to release that and let
go you feel like you have to keep doing
it even when it's not that fun anymore
and you're not getting the the the
dopamine Rush of trying something new
you're attached something you keep being
a lawyer whatever it might be because
that's your identity even when you don't
like it
anymore think about Michael Jordan
playing baseball which he did for a
little while he wanted to play
professional baseball yeah so he gave
himself the shot I think it's awesome
even though it didn't turn out as well
as it basketball turned out for him it
just because it it just reflected his
inherently competitive you know high
performance nature to keep doing
something or bzo so I keep bringing up
but you build the biggest most
successful company in the world Amazon
what what do you do in your retirement
you start a rocket company kind of thing
it's like you you like maybe he did I I
don't know this I don't want to put
words in his mouth but maybe he did get
a little bit bored with Amazon and it
was he needed to do something else but
he's not going to retire he's not going
to play golf he's not going to sit on
his boat he's going to go build another
company always have to be doing
something even if it's growing and
adapting you're working on a new book
and uh I eagerly anticipate the release
of that new book when's it coming out
September 2025 okay so we got a little
while to wait
um are you willing to share a few things
that you're thinking about or that um
you know we might to see in that book
yeah I think there there are pieces of
the book that you and I have talked
about today uh but the book is called
the art of spending money and I I make a
point of the book is not called the
science of spending money because
spending money is not a science it's not
something where you can say here's the
formula that works for everybody it's an
art and what is an art it is different
for everybody it's subjective it's often
contradictory and that's I think that's
what way to spend money should be so at
no point in the book do I say here's how
you should spend your money because I
don't think anybody can accurately do
that for a broad audience it's a look at
the psychology of Envy of keeping up
with the Joneses of social aspiration of
identity that we've been talking about
managing money and kids of being jealous
of other people of wanting to get
attention for yourself it's a look at
the psychology of that without offering
any firm concrete advice which I would
say a lot of people don't like that a
lot of people are like well just tell me
what to do
but I I try to make a point in the
beginning same with my first book
psychology and money of I can't tell you
what to do because I don't know you and
what's what's right for you is going to
be maybe not right for me you have to
figure it out for yourself but I can
tell you what's probably going through
your head as you're going on that
journey I can tell you about the
psychological pitfalls and challenges
and advice uh of that is that is
psychological it's not what you should
do but here's how most people and why
most people fall for envy and why if you
understand the mechanics of Envy how
silly it can be that's that's what the
book dives into
in a lot of ways what sounds like you're
describing is um kind of identifying the
sources of self- Seduction yeah where we
we by virtue of social media or just by
virtue of Being Human We compare what we
have to see if it really is what it is
uh you would think that we would be
pretty good as a species at just
experiencing things kind of like the dog
sitting next to the lake given that we
can understand that we have this
propensity to you know compare and um to
regret things of past but not be able to
anticipate future regret you'd think we
be we would be better at that but
clearly we're not well this I guess this
gets back to basic Evolution Evolution
doesn't care if you're happy it cares
that you reproduce and you grow over
time that's that's what it's maximizing
for it doesn't really care whether you
have a good time during the process make
more of yourself and take care of the
young and then you're dispensable keep
going Lis K says more of me that's
that's what we're trying to do and and
and whether you're happy or not doesn't
doesn't really play into the situation
and actually might reward the person who
is gaining a ton of resources even if
they're miserable in the process who's
making a ton of money in the process
even if they wake up miserable every
morning they're gaining a lot of
resources that might increase their
their Fitness over time happiness
doesn't play much of a role do you think
birth rates are going down because um
people feel that they have to use more
of what they earn for themselves or that
it's harder to establish a relationship
to money and resources that makes them
feel capable of taking care of others I
think it's it's so complex it doesn't
lead to simple answers but I think there
is a lot of evidence that what happens
why societies all over the world this
has always been the case have fewer kids
when they become wealthier is because
their expectations for those kids go up
so if you're living in a in a poor
Society poor economy or during a poor
era you could have 10 kids because you
knew all 10 of those kids or at least
the ones who survived were going to
become Farmers that's what they were
going to do and uh that was that was
their only hope that was all they could
do and you didn't need to provide a lot
of resources for them if I give them
basic food and shelter and clothes
that's all they need to become a farmer
and I think if you fast forward to
today's economy the expectations are so
much so much higher where you want your
kid to become a PhD to become an
astronaut to become a hedge fund
whatever it might be and there because
of that you need to provide so much more
resources for that kid I need to Foster
their growth and development from the
time that they are infants and provide
them tutors and after school activities
and maybe send them to private school
and definitely send them to a college
which is going to cost a fortune because
the expect ations for what you need to
provide are so much higher you feel like
you can only provide that to maybe one
maybe two kids which would have been a a
couple Generations ago three or four
kids and a couple Generations before
that 10 kids there's also a very Grim
statistic about it used to why do people
used to have 10 kids because six of them
died before they were five and so if you
needed those hands on the farm you
needed to have a lot of kids to make
sure you had a lot of teenagers who
could help you one day and so I think
we're blessed to now live in a world
where thankfully the infant mortality
rate is collapsed so much that we don't
need to play that Lottery game that we
used
to what are you teaching your kids about
money and it what age should uh we start
to do that and for those listening who
don't have kids um I suppose it's never
too late to learn I think one one of the
points I always make that I've learned
the hard way parenting is I I I don't
think you need to sit your kids down and
teach them about money because they're
paying attention whether you know it or
not kids are so incredibly good at
learning they're better learn they're
better at learning than adult are
particularly for things like language
and whatnot but you don't need to say
sit your kids down and say this is how
much we spend and this is what we value
and this is why I say they're paying
attention they're figuring it out every
time they hear you say I can't afford
this every time we're at the store and
they say oh look this is on sale let's
get two of these they're making a mental
note of everything every time they hear
you bicker about work every time they
hear you talk about a raise even if it's
just in the Next Room they're piecing it
all together and I don't think they even
know it but they're so good at learning
that they're building a mental model and
so even if never sit your kids down and
teach them by the time certainly that
they're teenagers they know a lot about
money and maybe some of those things are
are good maybe some is bad but they're
paying attention and so I think the only
thing you can do as a kid or as a parent
I should say is to lead by example
because we talked about this earlier the
propensity to Rebel as as a kid as a
teenager you talked about the smoking
ads where they just wanted to do the
opposite of what everyone else is doing
I think particularly for teenagers which
I don't have yet um but if you sit them
down and say this is what you should do
you should always do this you should
never do that their propensity to Rebel
is enormous so I think I I should think
it can backfire if you try to teach them
I think the best you can do the only
thing you can do is lead by example with
people one thing that a lot of not just
very wealthy people but moderately
wealthy people will say is and ask is
how do I teach my kids about money
without spoiling them how do I use my
money to help my kids without spoiling
them that's that's a big topic for a lot
of people even if you're like a a
middle- class family how do I you know
leave a small inheritance or help my
kids should I buy them a new car or
should I help them through College I
think a big thing that is is easy to
overlook uh is two things you might
think as a parent that you are teaching
your kid grit and independence by
withholding resources from them and
you're doing it very well-intentioned
you need to earn your I earn my money
and this is mine you got to go figure
out your own I think it is very easy to
overlook that you are not teaching your
kid Independence and grit you're
teaching them to resent you and I I have
a good friend Chris Davis who told the
story now he's an extreme example Chris
Davis's grandfather Shelby Davis who was
a billionaire investor one of the
greatest investors of all time and Chris
tells a story that uh when he was a kid
and his grandfather took him skiing his
grandfather would say if you want me to
buy you a lift ticket you need to hike
up the hill first and ski down hike to
the top and if you do that then I'll buy
you a lift ticket and Chris said the
lesson that they learned from that was
not grit and Independence and hard work
the lesson they learned from it was
Grandpa's kind of a jerk sometimes and
it's I think that's an extreme example
but you see that a lot with with kids
one like very practical takeaway from
this is that I think as a parent you
have to live the same lifestyle as your
kids it's very difficult to say Mom and
Dad fly first class but you're back in
coach does anyone actually do that oh
absolutely and maybe that's maybe that's
still a very extreme example but what
the you think as a parent that the kid
is learning is oh if I work as hard as
Mom and Dad one day I'll be sitting up
there and they don't the lesson they
learn is Mom and Dad are think that they
are superior to us or Mom and Dad are
superior to me I'm inferior to them I
think this is why you see a lot of very
wealthy kids who are just
psychologically broken because I I think
you have well-meaning parents who are
like look we're very wealthy but you're
not you got to earn your way and all the
kid hears throughout their life is I'm
inferior I'm inferior I'm inferior I'm
inferior and by the time they they
become adults that's it's so ingrained
into who they are that they can't take a
step forward they can't advocate for
themselves and so look that's that's
what the very wealthy deal with but I
think that's that's what I think a lot
about with kids the other thing that
every parent with more than one kid will
uh understand and recognize this my two
kids are could not be more different
their personalities their goals uh even
with the same parents living under the
same roof they are roof they are a
million miles apart and so had if you
say had like what what are you teaching
your kids like I I I don't know who
they're going to be when they grow up I
don't know what their goals or their
aspirations are going to be so is it
right for me to tell my daughter like oh
here's how you can save and become super
wealthy over time what if she doesn't
want to live that life what if she does
have more of a YOLO personality of like
oh I just want to go travel the world I
don't I have no aspirations to become
super wealthy and retire early uh so you
have to let them them figure it out for
themselves and realize that what might
be right for you and what may have been
right for the era in which you and I
grew up in might not be right for them
it might not fit the era that they grew
up in I like this saying um none of us
know what it's like to be you know
picking age 13 years old in 2024 we
think we do because we were 13 years old
at one point your earlier descriptions
of uh depriving kids of the first class
ticket um putting them in coach and and
the the parents flying In First Class it
it makes me realize that we like to
think that those sorts of things will
drive integration of the lesson but each
one of your examples pointed to the fact
that kids are integrating based on the
emotion they experience at the time
they're not thinking about the larger
lesson they're thinking about in there
in their moment they're think I'm hiking
up this hill and this sucks and they're
not piecing together things over time
I'm like okay I'm doing this and he's
trying to teach me a lesson right there
it's really uh they're very attached to
their immediate feelings right and maybe
it would be different in Chris Davis's
example if the grandpa hiked up the hill
with them because then the lesson you're
taking is like oh we're going to do this
together and and that is teaching the
value of hard work I'm going to do it
with you I'm going to suffer with you so
leading by example rather than by
humiliation I think is the way to do it
with
kids when I was a kid um my dad used to
walk me to this point along our street
where then he would split off to go to
work he so a scientist he would go to
his laboratory and I'd go off to to
kindergarten in first grade and I
remember one day asking him what he did
for a living and uh he's a physicist and
uh and he said well I'm a physicist and
I said what's that and he explained a
little bit about what it was and I'll
never forget we still talk about this he
and I I'll never forget um I said do you
like it and he said well you know that
feeling the night before your birthday I
said yeah and he said I feel like that
every day and then I think he also said
and I'm still a little bit murky on this
one I need to touch base with him about
this sometime again soon was he said
yeah you don't always get presence it
doesn't always work out but the feeling
that you might or that you're likely
going to or there's a possibility that
just feels so good and I think I must
have internalized that lesson because
what I like is work yeah I don't think
I'm addicted to work although someone in
my life have accused me of that um and
I'm willing to be open to that
possibility but it wasn't even really
about Discovery it was about the
possibility of discovery
and so I I think in in terms of teaching
to kids and teaching to peers and you
know teaching among
humans getting people in to think about
the verb states that really motivate
them from the best place seems to be the
kind of General theme throughout today's
discussion and in your book somewhat I'm
not trying to summarize to to too fine a
point here but if I may it seems like
get and what Rick Rubin has said about
you know he has this like just
Supernatural track record at bringing
out the best creat ative elements in
people from different genres of music it
seems to be about tapping into these
verb states of like what is the thing
that brings out your best as opposed to
thinking about the rewards that come
from that yeah but it's hard right we we
see those numbers we see those the
followers the dollars Etc we see the
metrics of comparison it's tough it's
it's it's there's a work to this that is
not obvious I think it'll always be like
that we're never going to live in a
world where people uh don't compare
themselves to others we're never going
to live in a world where people don't
feel in adequate to others who have more
than them but back to kids I think this
is a a great Pace to place TI this
together if you ask most parents what do
you want for your kids most parents will
say I just want them to be happy I just
hope I I hope they're happy one day and
then if you said well do you hope that
your children are rich and successful
parents might say like yeah but mainly
just happy like I I just want them to be
happy regardless of what they're doing
if they're a kindergarten teacher I want
them to be happy and I think um the
parents themselves say that because they
haven't done that themselves because the
parents themselves have chased money
over happiness and they see the downside
of it and I that's that's very common
and that's why they say I I I hope my
kid does this because I haven't done a
good job of that myself because the
Temptation is to do that is to pursue
something that's not going to make you
is going to make you richer but not
necessarily happier now that's not an
argument against money or working hard
which I want to do I want to work hard
and make money and have more money of
course but I think you there's such a
stark difference between using money as
a tool to make yourself happier versus
as a yard stick to compare yourself
against others by and so much in the
modern world is is the latter we're not
using money to make ourselves happier or
Freer or more independent or to sleep
better or to spend more time with the
people we enjoy we use money to measure
ourselves against other people it's just
do I have more than you is my car faster
than yours my house bigger than yours
and all of that is completely separated
from what we actually want like for our
kids and ultimately for ourselves which
is can I use this to become happier and
live a better life what a wild concept
but it seems just spoton
so we need to think about money a little
differently or a lot differently if we
are
to get the most satisfaction from our
work and from resources it requires a
lot of looking in the mirror into saying
like who am I and what do I want I think
that's the biggest thing particularly
when we started this conversation by
saying everybody is different what's
right for me is not right for you
inherent in that is that you have to
understand yourself and a lot of people
a lot of financial damage is done when
people have a financial plan that is
right for another person but it's wrong
for them and that's dangerous because
it's the right financial plan maybe for
a lot of other people so it makes sense
it's rational it makes sense on paper on
the spreadsheet looks good but it
doesn't fit your personality that's when
a lot of damage is done so I think to do
better with money you need to spend a
lot of time thinking about who you are
and your family and your goals and your
aspirations realizing that all those
things will change and adapt over time
so what was right for you 10 years ago
might not be right today and you know in
a way that might seem selfish like
tuning out the rest of the world tuning
out other people and co-workers and and
neighbors and whatnot and being just
saying how can I use this as a tool to
become happier to live a little bit
better life like what's the purpose of
money if it's not that I love it well
Morgan thank you so much for doing the
work that you do it's an incredibly
unique perspective on this thing that we
all have to deal with grapple with and
and uh hopefully can develop a a
symbiotic relationship with money and
it's clear from talking to you today and
also from reading your book that you
know there's a a strong central cord of
benevolence in all of this I I don't
know if that was your intent it seems to
just come through in who you are um but
when I read your book and as we talked
today it's just so clear like that you
want the best for people uh so I think
that's an important thing to highlight
because there are a lot of people out
there telling people how to make money
uh what to do or not to do with their
money but you're telling us how to live
more meaningful lives which is uh
something just order of magnitude more
important so for that and the work that
you've done and that you're doing I'm
eagerly anticipating your book next
September uh and for coming here today
to educate us thank you ever so much
this has been so much fun thank you
Andrew thank you for joining me for
today's discussion with Morgan housle to
learn more about Morgan's work and to
find links to his two superb books the
psychology of money and same as ever
please see the links in the show note
captions if you're learning from Andor
enjoying this podcast please subscribe
to our YouTube channel that's a terrific
zero cost way to support us in addition
please follow the podcast on both
Spotify and apple and on both Spotify
and apple you can leave us up to a
five-star review please check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast if you
have questions or comments about the
podcast or guests or topics that you'd
like me to consider for the huberman Lab
podcast please put those in the comment
section on YouTube I do read all the
comments for those of you that haven't
heard I have a new book coming out it's
my very first book
it's entitled protocols an operating
manual for the human body this is a book
that I've been working on for more than
5 years and that's based on more than 30
years of research and experience and it
covers protocols for everything from
sleep to exercise to Stress Control
protocols related to focus and
motivation and of course I provide the
scientific substantiation for the
protocols that are included the book is
now available by pre-sale at protocols
book.com there you can find links to
various vendors you can pick the one
that you like best again the book is
called protocols an operating manual for
the human body if you're not already
following me on social media I am hubman
lab on all social media platforms so
that's Instagram X formerly known as
Twitter threads Facebook and Linkedin
and on all those platforms I discuss
science and science related tools some
of which overlaps with the content of
the hubman Lab podcast but much of which
is distinct from the content on the
hubman Lab podcast again that's huberman
lab on all social media platforms if you
haven't already subscribe to our neural
network newsletter our neural network
newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly
newsletter that includes podcast
summaries as well as protocols in the
form of brief 1 to three page PDFs those
1 to three page PDFs cover things like
deliberate heat exposure deliberate cold
exposure we have a foundational Fitness
protocol we also have protocols for
optimizing your sleep dopamine and much
more again all available completely zero
cost simply go to huberman lab.com go to
the menu tab scroll down to newsletter
and provide your email we do not share
your email with anybody thank you once
again for joining me for today's
discussion with Morgan howel and last
but certainly not least thank you for
your interest in science
[Music]