welcome to hubman lab Essentials where
we revisit past episodes for the most
potent and actionable science-based
tools for mental health physical health
and
performance I'm Andrew huberman and I'm
a professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine let's continue our discussion
about
neuroplasticity this incredible feature
of our nervous system that allows it to
change itself in response to experience
and even in ways that we consciously and
deliberately decide to change it most
people don't know how to access
neuroplasticity and so that's what this
entire month of the huberman Lab podcast
has been about we've explored
neuroplasticity from a variety of
different perspectives we talked about
representational plasticity we talked
about the importance of focus and reward
we talked about this amazing and
somewhat surprising aspect of the
vestibular system how altering our
relationship to gravity and in addition
to that making error as we try and learn
can open up Windows to plasticity but we
have not really talked so much about
directing the plasticity toward
particular outcomes and thus far we
really haven't talked yet about how to
undo things that we don't want and so
today we are going to explore that
aspect of neuroplasticity and we are
going to do that in the context of a
very important and somewhat sensitive
topic which is pain and in some cases
injury to the nervous system we as
always here on this podcast are going to
discuss some of the science we get into
mechanism but we
also really get at principles principles
are far more important than any one
experiment or one description of
mechanism and certainly far more
important than any one protocol because
principles allow you to think about your
nervous system and work with it in ways
that best serve you so let's start our
discussion about pain and the somata
sensory system the somata sensory system
is as the name implies involved in
understanding touch physical feeling on
our body and the simplest way to think
about the somata sensory system is that
we have little sensors and Those sensors
come in the form of neurons nerve cells
that reside in our skin and in the
deeper layers below the skin we have
some that correspond to and we should
say respond to Mechanical touch so you
know pressure on the top of my hand or a
pinpoint or other sensors for instance
respond to heat to cold some respond to
vibration we have a huge number of
different receptors in our skin and they
take that information and send it down
these wires that we call axons in the
form of electrical signals to our spinal
cord and then up to the brain and within
the spinal cord andin brain we have
centers that interpret that information
that actually make sense of those
electrical signals and this is amazing
because none of those sensors has a
different unique form of information
that it uses it just sends electrical
potentials into the nervous system pain
and The Sensation of pain is Believe It
or Not A controversial word in the
Neuroscience field people prefer to use
the word no acception noors are the
sensors in the skin that detect
particular types of stimuli it actually
comes from the Latin word noera which
means to harm and why would neurosci
does not want to talk about pain well
it's very subjective it has a a mental
component and a physical component we
cannot say that pain is simply an
attempt to avoid physical harm to the
body and here's why they actually can be
dissociated from one another and there's
a famous case that was published in the
British Journal of Medicine where a
construction
worker I think he fell is how the story
went and a 14inch nail went through his
Boot and up through the boot and he was
in excruciating pain just beyond
anything he'd experienced he he reported
that he couldn't even move in any
Dimension even a tiny bit without
feeling excruciating pain they brought
him into the clinic into the hospital
they were able to cut away the boot and
they realized that the nail had gone
between two toes and it had actually not
imp impaled the skin at all his visual
image of the nail going through his boot
gave him the feeling the legitimate
feeling that he was experiencing the
pain of a nail going through his foot
which is incredible because it speaks to
the power of the Mind in this pain
scenario and it also speaks to the power
of the specificity it's not like he
thought that his foot was on fire he
thought because he saw a nail going
through his foot what it was going
through his boot but he thought it was
going through his foot that it was sharp
pain of the sort that a nail would
produce it really speaks to the
incredible capacity that these top down
these you know higher level cognitive
functions have in interpreting what
we're experiencing out in the periphery
even just on the basis of what we see so
why are we talking about pain during a
month on neuroplasticity Well turns out
that the pain system offers a a number
of different principles that we can
leverage to a ensure that if we are ever
injured we are able to understand the
difference between injury and pain
because there is a difference that if
we're ever in pain that we can
understand the difference between injury
and pain that we will be able to
interpret our pain and during the course
of today's podcast I'm going to cover
protocols that help eliminate pain from
both ends of the spectrum from the
periphery at the level of the injury and
through these top- down mental
mechanisms believe it or not we're going
to talk about love a colleague of mine
at Stanford who runs a major pain clinic
um is working on and has published
quality peer- rreview data on the role
of love in modulating the pain response
so what we're talking about today is
plasticity of perception which has
direct bearing on emotional pain and has
direct bearing on trauma so let's get
started in thinking about what happens
with pain and I will tell you just now
that there is a mutation a genetic
mutation in a particular sodium Channel
a sodium channel is uh one of these
little holes in neurons that allows them
to fire Action potentials it's important
to the function of the neuron it's also
important for the development of certain
neurons and there's a particular
mutation there are kids that are born
without this sodium Channel 1.7 if you
want to look it up those kids experience
no pain no pain whatsoever and it is a
terrible situation um they don't tend to
live very long due to accidents it's a
really terrible and unfortunate
circumstance in fact it's
reasonable to speculate that one of the
reasons not all but one of the reasons
why people might differ in their
sensitivity to pain is by way of genetic
variation in how many of these sorts of
receptors that they express people who
make too much of this receptor
experience extreme pain from even subtle
stimul
so let's talk about some of the features
of how we're built physically and how
that relates to pain and how we can
recover from injury so first of all we
have maps of our body surface in our
brain it's called a homunculus that
representation is scaled in a way that
matches sensitivity so the areas of your
body that are most sensitive have a lot
more brain real estate devoted to them
your back is an enormous piece of tissue
compared to your finger finger tip but
your back has fewer receptors devoted to
it and the representation of your back
in your brain is actually pretty small
whereas the representation of your
finger is enormous so the how big a
brain area is devoted to a given body
part is directly related to the density
of receptors in that body part not the
size of the body part you can actually
know how sensitive a given body part is
and how much brain area is devoted to it
through what's called twoo
discrimination you can do this
experiment if you want I think I've
described this once or twice before but
basically if you have someone put um
maybe take two pens and put them maybe 6
Ines apart on your back and and touch
while you're facing away and you they'll
ask you how many points they're touching
you and you say um two but if they move
those closer together say 3 in you're
likely to experience it as one point of
contact whereas on your finger you could
do play that game all day and as long as
there's a millimeter or so spacing you
will know that it's two points as
opposed to one and that's because
there's more pixels more density of
receptors this has direct bearing to
pain because it says that areas of the
body that have denser receptors are
going to be more sensitive to pain than
to others so just as a rule of thumb
areas of your body that are injured that
are large areas that have low
sensitivity before injury likely are
going to experience less pain
and the literature shows will heal more
slowly because they don't have as many
cells around to produce inflammation and
you might say wait I thought
inflammation is bad well one of the
things I really want to get across today
is that inflammation is not bad
inflammation out of control is bad but
inflammation is wonderful inflammation
is the tissue repair response I thought
it might be a nice time to just think
about the relationship between the
periphery and the central maps in a way
that many of you have probably heard
about before which will frame the
discussion a little bit better which is
Phantom limb pain now some of you are
probably familiar with this but for
people that have an arm or a leg or a
finger or some other portion of their
body amputated it's not uncommon for
those people to feel as if they still
have that limb or appendage or piece of
their body Inta and typically
unfortunately the sensation of that limb
is not one of the limb being nice and
relaxed and and you know and just there
the sensation is that the limb is
experiencing pain or is contorted in the
specific orientation that it was around
the time of the injury so if someone has
a you know a blunt force to the hand and
they end up having their hand amputated
typically they will continue to feel
pain in their Phantom hand which is
pretty wild and that's because the
representation of that hand is still
intact in the cortex in the brain
and it's trying to balance its levels of
activity normally it's getting what's
called proprioceptive feedback
proprioception is just our knowledge of
where our limbs are in space it's an
extremely important aspect of our somata
sensory system and there's no appropri
receptive feedback and so a lot of the
circuits start to ramp up their levels
of activity and they become very
conscious of the Phantom limb now um
before my lab was at Stanford I was at
UC San Diego and one of my colleagues
was a guy everyone just calls him by his
lap last name ramachandran who is famous
for understanding this Phantom limb
phenomenon and developing a very simple
but very powerful solution to it that
speaks to the incredible capacity of
top- down modulation and top- down
modulation the ability to use one's
brain cognition and senses to control
pain in the body is something that
everyone not just people missing limbs
or in chronic pain could learn to
benefit from because it is a way to tap
into the our ability to use our mind to
control perceptions of what's happening
in our body so what did ramachandran do
ramachandran had people who were missing
a limb put their intact limb into a box
that had mirrors in it such that when
they looked in the box and they moved
their intact limb the opposite limb
which was a reflection of the intact
limb because they're missing the
opposite limb they would see it as if it
was intact and as they would move their
intact limb they would visualize with
their eyes the the limb that's in the
place of the absent limb so this is all
by mirrors moving around and they would
feel immediate relief from the phantom
pain and he would tell them and they
would direct their hand toward a
orientation that felt comfortable to
them then they would exit the mirror box
they would take their their their hand
out and and they would feel as if the
hand was now in its relaxed normal
position so you could get real time in
moments remapping of the representation
of the hand now that's amazing this is
the kind of thing that all of us would
like to be able to do if we are in pain
because if you do anything for long
enough including live you're going to
experience pain of some sort and this
again I just want to remind you isn't
just about physical injuries and pain
this has direct relevance to emotional
pain as well which we of course we'll
talk talk about so the ramachandran
studies were really profound because
they said a couple of things one
plasticity can be very fast that it can
be driven by the experience of something
just the visual experience and so this
may come as a shock to some of you and
by no means it might trying to be
insensitive but pain is a perceptual
thing as much as it's a physical thing
it's a belief system about what you're
experiencing in your body and that has
important relevance for healing
different types of injury and the pain
associated with that injury now this
brings up another topic which is
definitely related to neuroplasticity
and injury but is a more General one
that I hear about a lot which is
traumatic brain injury many injuries are
not just about the limb and the the lack
of use of the limb but concussion and
head injury but I want to talk a little
bit about what is known about recovery
from concussion and this is very
important because it has implications
for just normal aging as well and offset
setting some of the cognitive decline
and physical decline that occurs with
normal aging typically after TBI there's
a constellation of symptoms that many
people if not all people with TBI report
which is headache photophobia that
lights become kind of aversive sleep
disruption trouble concentrating
sometimes mood issues there's you know a
huge range and of course the severity
will vary
Etc it's very clear that regardless of
whether or not there was a skull break
and regardless of when the TBI happened
and how many times it's happened that
the system that repairs the brain the
adult brain is mainly centered around
this lymphatic system that we call for
the brain the glymphatic system it's
sort of like a sewer system that clears
out the debris that surrounds neurons
especially injured neurons and the
glymphatic system is very active during
sleep and the glymphatic system is
something that you want very active
because it's going to clear away the
debris that sits between the neurons and
the cells that surround the connections
between the neurons called the glea
those cells are actively involved in
repairing the connections between
neurons when damaged so the glymphatic
system is so important that many people
if not all people who get TBI are told
get adequate rest you need to sleep and
that's kind of twofold advice on the one
hand it's telling you to get sleep
because all the good things happen in
sleep it's also about getting those
people to not continue to engage in
their activity fulltime or really try
and Hammer through it the glymphatic
system has been shown to be activated
further in two ways one is that sleeping
on one side not on back or stomach seems
to increase the amount of wash out or
wash through I should say of the
glymphatic system the other thing that
has been shown to improve the function
of the lymphatic system is a certain
form of exercise and I want to be very
very clear here I will never and I am
not suggesting that people exercise in
any way that aggravates their injury or
that goes against their Physician's
advice however there's some interesting
data that zone 2 cardio for 30 to 45
minutes three times a week seems to
improve the rates of clearance of some
of the
debris after injury and in general
injury or no to accelerate and improve
the rates of flow for the lymphatic
system it could be fast walking it could
be jogging if you can do that with your
injury safely could be cycling and this
is really interesting outside of TBI
because what we know from aging is that
aging is a nonlinear process it's not
like with every year of Life your brain
gets a little older it's a has sometimes
it follows what's more like a step
function you get these big jumps in in a
in markers of Aging I guess that we
could think of them as jumps down
because it's a negative thing for most
everybody would like to live longer and
be healthier in brain and body and so
the types of exercise I'm referring to
now are really more about brain
longevity and about keeping the brain
healthy than they are about physical
fitness so I think this is really
interesting and if some of you would
like to know the mechanism or at least
the hypothesize mechanism ISM there's a
a a molecule called aquaporin 4 that is
related to the gal system so Gia are the
it means glue and Latin are these are
these cells in the brain the most
numerous cells in the brain in fact that
in sheath synapses but they're very
Dynamic cells aquaporin 4 is mainly
expressed by the gal cell called the
astroy Astro looks like a little star
incredibly interesting cells and the the
thing to remember is that the asites
bridge the connection between the
neurons
the synapse the connections between them
and the vasculature the blood system and
the gimatic system so this glymphatic
system and the gal asroy system is a
system that we want chronically active
throughout the day as much as possible
so low-level walking Zone 2 cardio and
then at night during slow wave sleep is
then really when this lymphatic system
kicks in so that should hopefully be an
actionable takeaway provided that you
can do that kind of cardio safely
that I believe everybody should be doing
who cares about brain longevity not just
people who are trying to get over TBI
now I'd like to return a little bit to
some of the subjective aspects of pain
modulation because I think it's so
interesting and so actionable that
everyone should know about this our
interpretation our subjective
interpretation of a sensory event is
immensely powerful for dictating our
experience of the event the molecule
adrenaline when it's liberated into our
body truly blunts our experience of pain
we all know the stories of people you
know walking you know miles on stumped
legs um people doing all sorts of things
that were incredible
Feats that allowed them to move through
what would otherwise be pain and
afterward they do experience extreme
pain but during the event often times
they are not experiencing pain and
that's because of the pain blunting
effects of adrenaline adrenaline binding
to particular receptors actually shuts
down pain
Pathways people who anticipate an
injection of morphine immediately report
the feeling of loss of pain their pain
starts to diminish because they know
they're going to get pain relief and
it's a powerful effect now all of you
are probably saying placebo effect
Placebo effects are very real Placebo
effects and belief effects as they're
called have a profound effect on our
experience of noxious stimul like pain
and they can also have a profound effect
on positive stimuli and things that
we're looking forward to one study that
I think is particularly interesting here
from my colleague at Stanford Sean
Mackey they did a neuroimaging study
they subjected people to pain in this
case it was a a heat pain people have
very specific thresholds to heat at
which they cannot tolerate any more heat
but they explored the extent to which
looking at an image of somebody in this
case a romantic partner that the person
loved would allow them to adjust their
pain
response and it turns out it does they
could tolerate more pain and they
reported it as not as
painful that response that feeling of
Love internally can blunt the pain
experience to a significant degree these
are not small effects and not
surprisingly how early a relationship is
how new a relationship is directly
correlat with people's ability they
showed to use this love this internal
representation of love to blunt the pain
response so for those of you that have
been with your partners for many years
and you love them very much and you're
obsessed with them terrific you have a
pre-installed well I suppose it's not
pre-installed you had to do the work
because relationships are work but
you've got a installed mechanism for
blunting pain and again these are not
minor effects these are major effects
and it's all going to be through that
top down modulation that we talked about
not unlike the mirrorbox experiments
with Phantom limb that relieve phantom
pain or some other top- down modulation
in the opposite example is the nail
through the boot which is a visual image
that made the person think it was
painful when in fact it was painful even
though there was no tissue damage it was
all perceptual so the pain system is
really subject to these perceptual
influences which is remarkable because
really when we think about the somata
sensory system it has this cognitive
component it's got this peripheral
component but there's another component
which is the way in which our sensation
our somatos sensory system is woven in
with our autonomic nervous system
independent of love we're going to talk
about something quite different which is
putting needles and electricity in
different parts of the body so-called
acupuncture something that for many
people were it it's been viewed as a
kind of alternative medicine but now
there are excellent Laboratories
exploring what's called
electroacupuncture and acupuncture and I
think what you'll be interested in and
surprised to learn is that it does work
but sometimes it can exacerbate pain and
sometimes it can relieve pain and it all
does that through very discrete Pathways
for which we can really say this neuron
connects to that neuron connects to the
adrenals and we can tie this all back to
dopamine because in the end it's the
chemicals and neural circuits that are
giving rise to these perceptions or
these experiences rather of things that
we call pain love ET Etc there are
actually a lot of really good
peer-reviewed studies supporting the use
of acupuncture for in particular GI trct
issues in recent years there's been an
emphasis on trying to understand the
mechanism of things like acupuncture and
acupuncture itself but as a way to try
and understand how these sorts of
practices might actually benefit people
who are experiencing pain or for
changing the nervous system or brain
body relationship in general what I want
to talk about in terms of acup puncture
is the incredible way in which
acupuncture
illuminates the cross talk between the
somata sensory system our ability to
feel stuff externally exteroception
internally
interoception and how that somata
sensory system is wired in with and
communicating with our autonomic nervous
system that regulates our levels of
alertness or
calmness so this takes us all back to
the homunculus we have this
representation of our body surface in
our
brain that representation is what we
call
somatotopic and what somatotopy is is it
just means that areas of your body that
are near one another are represented by
neurons that are nearby each other in
the brain the connections from those
brain neurons are sent into the body and
they are synchronized with meaning they
Crosswire with and and form synapses
with some of the input from the viscera
from our guts from our diaphragm from
our stomach from our spleen from our
heart our internal organs are sending
information up to this map in our brain
of the body surface but it's about
internal information what we call
interoception our ability to look inside
or imagine inside and feel what we're
feeling inside so the way to think about
this accurately is that our
representation of our self is a
represent ation of our internal workings
our viscera our guts everything inside
our skin and the surface of our skin and
the external World those three things
are always being combined in a very
interesting complex but very seamless
way acupuncture involves taking needles
and sometimes electricity Andor heat as
well and stimulating particular
locations on the body and if somebody
has a gastrointestinal issue like their
their guts are moving too quick they
have diarrhea you stimulate this area
and it'll slow their gut motility down
or if their gut motility is too slow
they're constipated you stimulate
someplace else and it accelerates it and
you know hearing about this of it sounds
kind of to a Westerner who's not
thinking about the underlying neural
circuitry it could sound kind of wacky
but when you look at the neural
circuitry the neuro Anatomy it really
starts to make sense intense stimulation
of the abdomen however with these
electroacupuncture has a very strong
effect of an increasing inflammation in
the body body and this is important to
understand because it's not just that
stimulating the the gut does this
because you're activating the gut area
it activates a particular nerve pathway
for the afficionados it's the splenic
spinal sympathetic axis if you really
want to know and it's pro-inflammatory
under most conditions if for instance
the person is dealing with a particular
bacterial infection that can be
beneficial and this goes back to a much
earlier discussion that we had on a
previous podcast that we'll revisit
again and again which is that the stress
response was designed to combat
infection so it turns out that there are
certain patterns of stimulation on the
abdomen that can actually liberate
immune cells from our immune organs like
our spleen and counter infection when
you stimulate these Pathways that
activate in particular the adrenals the
adrenal gland liberates norepinephrine
and epinephrine and the brain does as
well it binds to what are called the
beta noradrenergic receptor okay so this
is really getting kind of down into the
weeds but the beta nuragic receptors
activate the spleen which liberate cells
that combat infection that's the
short-term quick
response the more intense stimulation of
the abdomen and other areas can be
pro-inflammatory because of the ways
that they trigger certain Loops that go
back to the brain and Trigger the sort
of anxiety Pathways that exacerbates
pain so one pathway stimulates
norepinephrine and blunts PL the other
one doesn't what does all this mean how
are we supposed to put all this together
well there's a paper that was published
in nature medicine in 2014 this is an
excellent Journal that describes how
dopamine can activate the Vegas
peripherally and nor norepinephrine can
activate the Vegas peripherally and
reduce inflammation what this means is
that there are real maps of our body
surface that when
stimulated communicate with our
autonomic nervous system the system
system that controls alertness or
calmness and thereby releases either
molecules like norepinephrine and
dopamine which make us more alert and
blunt our response to pain and they
reduce
inflammation but there are yet other
Pathways that when stimulated are
pro-inflammatory one of the things that
bothers me so much these days and I'm
not easily irritated but what really
bothers me is when people are talking
about inflammation like inflammation is
bad inflammation is terrific
inflammation is the reason why cells are
called to the site of injury to clear it
out inflammation is what's going to
allow you to heal from any injury
chronic inflammation is bad but acute
inflammation is absolutely essential
remember those kids that we talked about
earlier that have mutations in these
receptors that for sensing pain they
never get inflammation and that's why
their joints literally disintegrate it's
really horrible because they don't
actually have the inflammation response
because it was never triggered by the
pain response so I think that the data
on acupuncture turning out to be very
interesting before I continue I just
thought I'd answer a question that I get
a lot uh which is what about Wim Hoff
breathing Wim Hoff also called AKA The
Iceman um has his breathing that's
similar to uh Tumo breathing as it was
originally called involves basically
hyperventilating and then doing some
exhales and some breath holds a number
of people have asked me about it in uh
in relation to pain management the
effect of doing that kind of breathing
it's not a mysterious effect it
liberates adrenaline from the adrenals
when you have adrenaline in your system
and when the spleen is very
active that response is used to counter
infection and stress counters infection
by liberating killer cells in the body
you don't want the stress response to
stay on indefinitely however things like
Wim Hoff breathing like ice baz anything
that releases adrenaline will counter
the infection but you want to regulate
the duration of that adrenaline response
today we've talked about a variety of
tools but I want to Center in on a
particular sequence of tools that
hopefully you won't need but presumably
if you're a human being and you're
active you will need at some point it's
about managing injury and recovering and
healing fast or at least as fast as
possible it includes removing the pain
it includes getting Mobility back and
getting back to a normal life whatever
that means for you
I want to emphasize that what I'm about
to talk about next was developed in
close consultation with Kelly starett
who many of you probably have heard of
before Kelly can be found at the ready
State he's a formally trained so degreed
and educated exercise physiologist he's
a world expert in movement and tissue
Rehabilitation so I asked Kelly I made
it really simple I said okay let's say I
were to sprain my ankle or break my arm
or injure my knee or ACL tear or
something like that or shoulder injury
what are the absolute necessary things
to do regardless of situation so the
first one is a very basic one that now
you have a lot of information to act on
which is sleep is essential and so we
both agreed 8 hours of sleep would be
ideal but if not at least 8 hours
inmobile so that's a
non-negotiable in terms of getting the
foundation for allowing for glymphatic
clearance and tissue clearance Etc the
other is if possible unless it's
absolutely excruciating when you just
can't do it a 10-minute walk per day of
course you don't want to exacerbate the
injury at least a 10-minute walk per day
and probably longer this is where it
gets interesting I was taught I learned
that when you injure yourself you're
supposed to ice something you're
supposed to put ice on it but I didn't
realize this but when speaking to
exercise physiologists and some
Physicians they said that the ice is
really more of a placebo it numbs the
the environment of the injury which is
not surprising and will eliminate the
pain for a short while but it has some
negative effects that perhaps offset its
use it actually can create some like
clotting and sludging of the of the
tissue and fluids which is bad because
you want the macras and the other cell
types phagocytosing eating up the debris
and and injury and moving it out of
there so that it can repair so that was
surprising to me which made me ask well
then what about heat well it turns out
heat is actually quite beneficial the
major effects seem to be explained by
heat improving the viscosity of the
tissues and the clearance and the
profusion of of fluid blood lymph and
other fluids out of the injury area so
all of this might sound just like Common
Sense knowledge I always just thought
it's ice it's non-steroid
anti-inflammatory drugs it's things that
block block prostag gland and so things
like aspirin ibuprofen acetam Menin
those things generally work by blocking
things like the the they're called Co
the Cox uh prostag gland in blockers and
things of that sort things in that
pathway those sorts of treatments which
reduce inflammation may not be so great
at the beginning when you want
inflammation they may be important for
limiting pain so people can be
functional at all but the things that I
talked about today really are anchored
in three principles one is that the
inflammation response is a good one it
calls to the to the sight of injury
things that are going to clean up the
injury in bad cells
then there are going to be things that
are going to improve profusion like the
glymphatic system getting deep sleep
feet elevated sleeping on one side
low-level Zone 2 cardio three times a
week many people ask me about platelet
rich plasma so-called PRP they take
blood they enrich for platelets and they
re-inject it back into people here's the
deal it has never been shown whether or
not the injection itself is what's
actually creating the effect the claims
that PRP actually contains stem cells
are very very feeble and when you look
at the literature and you talk to anyone
expert in the stem cell field they will
tell you that it's the number of stem
cells in PRP is infinim small stem cells
are an exciting area of Technology
however there's a clinic down in Florida
that was shut down a couple years ago
for injecting stem cells harvested from
patients into the eye for immaculate
degener ation these were people that
were suffering from um poor vision and
very shortly after injecting uh these
stem cells into the eyes they went
completely blind and I'm not here to
tell you that you should or shouldn't do
something but I do think that anything
involving stem cells one should be very
cautious of the major issue with stem
cells that I think is concerning is that
stem cells are cells that want to become
lots of different things not just the
tissue that you're interested in so if
you damage your knee and you you inject
stem cells into your knee you need to
molecularly restrict those stem cells so
that they don't become tumor cells right
a tumor is a collection of stem cells
one needs to approach this with Extreme
Caution even if it's your own blood or
stem cells that you're re-injecting so
I'm going to close there I've talked
about a lot of tools today I've talked a
lot about somea sensation about
plasticity about pain about
acupuncture some of the Nuance of
acupuncture inflammation stress we even
talked a little bit about high-intensity
breathing so as always we take kind of a
whirlwind tour through a given topic lay
down some tools as we go hopefully the
principles that relate to pain and
injury but also neuroplasticity in
general today in the context of the
somata sensory system will be of use to
all of you I don't wish injury on any of
you but I do hope that you'll take the
information do with it what you will
once again thanks so much for your time
and attention today and as always thank
you for your interest in science
[Music]